ACCOUNTING
(WH) {ACCT}
SM . EMPIR DESIGN IN ACCT RES.
L/R 101. Principles of Accounting I. (C)
This course is an introduction to the basic concepts and standards underlying financial accounting
systems. Several important concepts will be studied in detail, including: revenue recognition, inventory,
long-lived assets, present value, and long term liabilities. The course emphasizes the construction of
the basic financial accounting statements - the income statement, balance sheet, and cash flow
statement - as well as their interpretation.
L/R 102. Managerial Accounting. (C)
The first part of the course presents alternative methods of preparing managerial accounting
information, and the remainder of the course examines how these methods are used by companies.
Managerial accounting is a company's internal language, and is used for decision-making, production
management, product design and pricing and for motivating and evaluating employees. Unless you
understand managerial accounting, you cannot have a thorough understanding of a company's
internal operations. What you learn in this course will help you understand the operations of your
future employer (and enable you to be more successful at your job), and help you understand other
companies you encounter in your role as competitor, consultant, or investor.
201. Financial Accounting I. (A) Prerequisite(s): ACCT 101,102.
This course revisits topics covered in Introductory Financial Accounting (Accounting 101), with a focus
on the asset side of the balance sheet: Cash, accounts and notes receivable, inventory, marketable
securities, equity investments, PPE, and intangibles. The course also covers revenue and expense
recognition issues, and generally accepted accounting principles that affect the format and
presentation of the financial statements.
202. Financial Accounting II. (B) Prerequisite(s): ACCT 101,102.
Covers liabilities and equities, especially long-term debt, convertible securities, equity issuance,
dividends, share repurchases, employee stock options, pensions, leases, deferred tax, and derivative
securities. Related topics covered include computation of diluted earnings per share, disclosure
issues, earnings management, and basic financial statement analysis of cash flows.
203. (ACCT703) Cost Accounting. (B) Prerequisite(s): ACCT 101,102, STAT 101,102 & ECON 001.
Deals with the application of statistical tools and decision models to accounting data for the purpose
of facilitating managerial control.
208. (ACCT718) Auditing. (C) Prerequisite(s): ACCT 201, 202 or equivalent.
This course includes a consideration of the historical role of the auditor and the changing role in
today's environment, the organization of the accounting profession, and the new influences of the
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board. It introduces the students to generally accepted
auditing standards, professional ethics, and legal liability. A conceptual theory of auditing is discussed
and practical examples of auditing techniques and work programs are used to illustrate the application
of the theory. The course also covers the auditor's reporting standards and uses case studies and
professional journal articles as bases for discussion and analysis.

Page 1 of 4

ACCOUNTING
(WH) {ACCT}
242. (ACCT742) Financial Statements: Analysis & Reporting Incentives. (C) Prerequisite(s):
ACCT 101.
In the course, students learn how to analyze firms' financial statements and disclosures to determine
how a firm's particular accounting choices reflect the underlying economics of the firm. As a result,
the course strengthens students' ability to use financial statements as part of an overall assessment
of the firm's strategy and valuation. The course is especially useful for anyone interested in working
on the buy or sell side.
The course provides both a framework for and the tools necessary to analyze financial statements.
At the conceptual level, it emphasizes that preparers and users of financial statements have different
objectives and incentives. At the same time, the course is applied and stresses the use of actual
financial statements. For example, students learn how to detect when firms are managing earnings
and/or balance sheets. It draws heavily on real business problems and uses cases to illustrate the
application of the techniques and tools.
243. (ACCT743) Accounting for Mergers, Acquisitions, and Complex Financial Structures. (A)
Prerequisite(s): Prerequisites: ACCT 101, 102, 201, 202.
The objective of this course is to discuss and understand the accounting that underlies merger,
acquisition, and investment activities among firms that result in complex financial structures. Key
topics include the purchase accounting method for acquisitions, the equity method for investments,
the preparation and interpretation of consolidated financial statements, tax implications of mergers
and acquisitions, earnings-per-share considerations, the accounting implications of intercompany
transactions and non-domestic investments, etc.
297. (ACCT897) Taxes and Business Strategy. (C) Prerequisite(s): ACCT 101 and FNCE 101.
The objective of this course is to develop a framework for understanding how taxes affect business
decisions. The key themes of the framework - all parties, all taxes and all costs - are applied to
decision contexts such as investments, compensation, organizational form, and mergers and
acquisitions. The ultimate goal is to provide a new approach to thinking about taxes that will be
valuable even as laws and governments change.
399. Supervised Study. (C) Prerequisite(s): Senior standing and 3.4 average in major related
subjects.
Intensive reading and study with some research under the direction of a faculty member. Approval
from one of the departmental advisers must be obtained before registration.
611. Fundamentals of Financial Accounting. (C)
The objective of this course is to provide an understanding of financial accounting fundamentals for
prospective consumers of corporate financial information, such as managers, stockholders, financial
analysts, and creditors. The course focuses on understanding how economic events like corporate
investments, financing transactions and operating activities are recorded in the three main financial
statements (i.e., the income statement, balance sheet, and statement of cash flows). Along the way,
students will develop the technical skills needed to analyze corporate financial statements and
disclosures for use in financial analysis, and to interpret how accounting standards and managerial
incentives affect the financial reporting process. This course is recommended for students who want a
more in-depth overview of the financial accounting required for understanding firm performance and
potential future risks through analysis of reported financial information, such as students intending to
go into security analysis and investment banking.

Page 2 of 4

ACCOUNTING
(WH) {ACCT}
612. Accelerated Financial Accounting. (A)
The intended audience for this course is students with prior knowledge of financial accounting who
understand: (1) the recording of economic transactions in the accounting records; (2) the basic
financial statements that summarize a firm's economic transactions (the balance sheet, the income
statement and the statement of cash flows) and (3) the fundamental concepts needed to prepare or
understand published financial statements (e.g. use of accrual accounting). Exploiting prior
knowledge, the course aims in six weeks to help students become effective users of financial
statements.
613. Fundamentals of Financial and Managerial Accounting. (C)
This course provides an introduction to both financial and managerial accounting, and emphasizes
the analysis and evaluation of accounting information as part of the managerial processes of
planning, decision-making, and control. A large aspect of the course covers the fundamentals of
financial accounting. The objective is to provide a basic overview of financial accounting, including
basic accounting concepts and principles, as well as the structure of the income statement, balance
sheet, and statement of cash flows. The course also introduces elements of managerial accounting
and emphasizes the development and use of accounting information for internal decisions. Topics
include cost behavior and analysis, product and service costing, and relevant costs for internal
decision-making. This course is recommended for students who will be using accounting information
for managing manufacturing and service operations, controlling costs, and making strategic decisions,
as well as those going into general consulting or thinking of starting their own businesses.
706. Cost Management. (C) Prerequisite(s): ACCT 611/612/613 or waiver. Lecture, case studies,
class participation, written group cases, and exams.
This course covers managerial accounting and cost management practices that can be strategically
applied across the various functions of a business organization to improve organizational
performance. The course emphasizes the methods available to measure and evaluate costs for
decision-making and performance evaluation purposes. It reviews a number of cost management
issues relating to the design and implementation of strategic, marketing, value analysis, and other
management models in modern firms; and identifies major contemporary issues in managerial
accounting and financial decision- making. A variety of case studies in different industries and
decision contexts are used to examine the application of these concepts.
718. (ACCT208) Auditing. (C) Prerequisite(s): ACCT 611/612/613 or waiver.
This course includes a consideration of the role of the auditor, the organization of the accounting
profession, and the current audit environment. It introduces the student to generally accepted auditing
standards, professional ethics, and legal liability. A conceptual theory of auditing is discussed and
practical examples of auditing techniques and work programs are used to illustrate the application of
the theory. The course also covers the auditor's reporting standards and uses case studies and
professional journal articles as bases for discussion and analysis.
747. Financial Statement and Disclosure Analysis. (C) Prerequisite(s): ACCT 611/612/613
completed or waiver.
This course focuses on the analysis of financial communications between corporate managers and
outsiders, including the required financial statements, voluntary disclosures, and interactions with
investors, analysts, and the media. The course draws on the findings of recent academic research to
discuss a number of techniques that outsiders can use to detect potential bias or aggressiveness in
financial reporting. FORMAT: Case discussions and lectures. Comprehensive final exam, group
project, case write-ups, and class participation.

Page 3 of 4

ACCOUNTING
(WH) {ACCT}
SM 910. Accounting Theory Research. (A)
The course includes an introduction to various analytical models and modeling/mathematical
techniques that are commonly used in accounting research as well as related empirical applications.
SM 921. Empirical Research in Accounting I. (B)
The course covers empirical research design and provides students with a perspective on historically
important accounting research. Topics covered such as research on the time-series and crosssectional properties of financial accounting measures, capital markets behavior, financial
intermediaries, and international accounting research.
SM 922. Empirical Research in Accounting II. (B)
The course covers empirical research design and provides students perspective on historically
important accounting research. Topics covered such as research on the time-series and crosssectional properties of financial accounting measures, capital markets behavior, financial
intermediaries, and international accounting research. Topics covered may include corporate
governance, executive compensation, debt contracting, accounting regulation, tax, and management
accounting.
SM 930. Empirical Design in Accounting Research. Prerequisite(s): At least one graduate level
course in econometrics.
Course on empirical methods and their application to accounting research topics.

Page 4 of 4

