AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
SM 019. AFAM Freshman Seminar. (A) Hanchard.
This course will introduce students to a more hemispheric understanding of the American experience,
through the writings of many authors from the New World, including the United States, on what it
means to be an American. Students will read texts from many genres including but not limited to
poetry, film, prose, political speeches and autobiography, to come to terms with histories of native
Americans, African-Americans, Latinos, and whites in the United States, as well as peoples of South
America and the Caribbean. In the process students will become familiar with scholarship across the
social sciences and humanities that consider issues of race, culture, nation, freedom and inequality in
the Americas, and how racial slavery and the Afro-American hemispheric experience has informed
multiple American visions.
SM 080. Introduction to American Literature. (B) Staff. This course is cross-listed with ENGL 080
(Introduction to American Literature) when the course content is related to Afro-American issues.
Topics vary. Consult the Center for Africana Studies for a detailed course description.
A consideration of outstanding literary treatments of American culture from its beginnings until the
dawn of the 20th century. Works read generally include autobiographies and travel accounts as well as
fiction and poetry.
SM 148. (COML148, RUSS149) Slavery and Serfdom. (M) Wilson.
During the Cold War, the United States and Russia were locked in an ideological battle, as capitalist
and communist superpowers, over the question of private property. So how did these two countries
approach the most important question regarding property that ever faced human civilization: how could
governments justify the treatment of its subjects, people, as property? In 1862, Russia abolished
serfdom, a form of human bondage that had existed in its territories since the 11th century. Just a year
later, in 1863, Abraham Lincoln signed the Emancipation Proclamation, declaring America's slaves
then, thenceforward, and forever free. What forces, both domestic and international, both political and
cultural, influenced this near simultaneous awakening in which huge swaths of the Russian and U.S.
populations were liberated? While scholars have often sought to compare slavery and serfdom as
institutions, this course does not attempt to draw connections between the two. Rather, we will focus
on how the slavery/anti-slavery and serfdom/anti-serfdom debates were framed in each respective
country as well as how Russia used American slavery and the U.S. used Russian serfdom to shape
their own domestic debates.
Though primarily literary in nature, this course will also take into account historical, journalistic,
scientific, and cinematic sources in an attempt to illuminate the cultures of and against bondage that
dominated Russia and the U.S., particularly in the 19th century. Attention will also be paid to systems
of mass incarceration that emerged in Russia and the U.S. following the abolishment of serfdom and
slavery.
SM 321. Understanding African Conflict. (A) Ali-Dinar.
The end of colonial rule was the spring board for the start of cold wars in various regions of Africa.
Where peace could not be maintained violence erupted. Even where secession has been attained, as
in the new country of South Sudan, the threat of civil war lingers. While domestic politics have led to
the rise of armed conflicts and civil wars in many African countries, the external factors should also not
be ignored. Important in all current conflicts is the concern to international peace and security. Overall
this course will: (1) investigate the general nature of armed conflicts in Africa (2) provide in-depth
analysis of the underlining factors (3) and discuss the regional and the international responses to
these conflicts and their implications. Special emphasis will be placed upon African conflicts and civil
wars in: great Lakes area, Mali, Nigeria, Senegal, Sudan, Somalia, South Sudan, and Uganda.

Page 1 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
SM 411. (HIST412, INTR290) TOPICS IN WORLD HISTORY. (C)

Undergraduate Courses
001. (ENGL071, HIST007, RELS007, SOCI027) Introduction to Africana Studies. (C) Humanities &
Social Science Sector. Class of 2010 & beyond. Beavers, Butler, Charles, Harris, Savage, Ramsey,
Shaw, Tillet, Zuberi.
The aim of this course is to provide an interdisciplinary examination of the complex array of African
American and other African Diaspora social practices and experiences. This class will focus on both
classic texts and modern works that provide an introduction to the dynamics of African American and
African Diaspora thought and practice. Topics include: What is Africana Studies?; The History Before
1492; Creating the African Diaspora After 1500; The Challenge of Freedom; Race, Gender and Class
in the 20th Century; From Black Studies to Africana Studies: The Future of Africana Studies.
002. (SOCI001) Introduction to Sociology. (C) Society Sector. All classes. Imoagene, Zuberi.
We live in a country which places a premium on indivdual accomplishments. Hence, all of you worked
extremely hard to get into Penn. Yet, social factors also have an impact on life chance. This class
provides an oveview of how membership in social groups shapes the outcomes of individuals. We will
look at a range of topics from the organizational factors which promoted racial inequality in Ferguson,
Mo to the refusal of (mostly elite) parents to vaccinate their children. The experience of women and
men in the labor market -- and the social factors that lead women to earn less than men -- is another
interesting topic taken up in the course. Who gets ahead in America? Course requirements include a
midterm, research paper (five to six pages), final and recitation activities. Students are not expected to
have any previous knowledge of the topic. Welcome to the course!
L/R 006. (ASAM006, SOCI006, URBS160) Race and Ethnic Relations. (C) Charles, Kao, Zuberi.
The course will focus on race and ethnicity in the United States. We begin with a brief history of racial
categorization and immigration to the U.S. The course continues by examining a number of topics
including racial and ethnic identity, interracial and interethnic friendships and marriage, racial attitudes,
mass media images, residential segregation, educational stratification, and labor market outcomes.
The course will include discussions of African Americans, Whites, Hispanics, and Asian Americans
and Multiracials.
SM 010. (PSCI010) Freshman Seminar. (C) Gottschalk.
This course is cross-listed with PSCI 010 (Freshmen Seminar) when the subject matter is related to
African American or other African Diaspora issues. Topics vary. A recent topic is "Race, Crime, and
Punishment." See the Africana Studies Department's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a
description of the current offerings.
SM 011. (SOCI011, URBS112) Urban Sociology. (M) Staff.
This course is a comprehensive introduction to the sociological study of urban areas. This includes
more general topics as the rise of cities and theories urbanism, as well as more specific areas of
inquiry, including American urbanism, segregation, urban poverty, suburbanization and sprawl,
neighborhoods and crime, and immigrant ghettos. The course will also devote significant attention to
globalization and the process of urbanization in less developed counties.

Page 2 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
SM 015. (HIST104) Freshman Seminar in 20TH Century History. (C) Williams.
In this First Year Seminar we will use coming-of-age autobiographies to explore some of the most
significant historical developments of the 20th century. By coming of age I mean autobiographies in
which the author focuses primarily on the periods of childhood and adolescence into young adulthood.
We will read books by people who lived during segregation in the South, the Great Depression,
Japanese Internment during World War II, and the Civil Rights Movement of the 1960s. We will
consider many issues, including: race, racism, immigration, religion, social class, and gender. We will
contemplate questions about identity, family, honesty, and memory. As we read each book we will
examine an individual life in a particular place and time, and we will move out beyond the confines of a
person, family, or town to explore the broader historical moment in which the individual lived. To make
this deeper contextualization possible, the course is divided into segments that will allow us to study
the historical context of the autobiography as well as engage in focused discussion of the texts
themselves.
SM 017. (ENGL016) Topics in Literature. (C) Beavers, Jaji, Tillet. Freshmen Seminar, Arts Scholars
Program
Freshmen Seminars under the title "Topics in Literature" will afford entering students who are
considering literary study, the opportunity to explore a particular and limited subject with a professor
whose current work lies in that area. Topics may range from the lyric poems of Shakespeare's period
to the ethnic fiction of contemporary America. Small class-size will insure all students the opportunity
to participate in lively discussions. Students may expect frequent and extensive writing assignments,
but these seminars are not writing courses; rather they are intensive introductions to the serious study
of literature.
See the Africana Studies Department's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a description of
the current offerings.
SM 018. (AFST018, ANTH018) Popular Culture in Africa. (C) Barnes. Freshman Seminar
This course concentrates on popular culture in sub-Saharan Africa. It examines the way people reflect
on and represent various aspects and issues in their daily lives, in public media, and through a diverse
range of performative and creative outlets. It explores the way cultural traditions are created,
promulgated, and perpetuated. It looks at the way popular culture deals with pleasure and pain;
identitity, difference, and diversity; wealth and power; modernity and history; gender relations;
suppression, resistance, and violence; and local versus global processes. In short, popular culture will
serve as a window through which to observe contemporary life.
069. (COML069, ENGL069) Poetry and Poetics. (M) Jaji.
This course is cross-listed with ENGL069 (Poetry and Poetics) when the subject is related to African
American or other African Diaspora issues.
See the Africana Studies Department's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a description of
the current offerings.

Page 3 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
SM 041. (SOCI041, URBS010) Homelessness & Urban Inequality. (C) Culhane. This freshmen
seminar is cross-listed with URBS 010 when the subject matter is related to African, African American,
or other African Diaspora issues. A recent topic is "Homelessness and Urban Inequality." See the
Africana Studies Department's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a description of the
current offerings.
This freshman seminar examines the homelessness problem from a variety of scientific and policy
perspectives. Contemporary homelessness differs significantly from related conditions of destitute
poverty during other eras of our nation's history. Advocates, researchers and policymakers have all
played key roles in defining the current problem, measuring its prevalence, and designing interventions
to reduce it. The first section of this course examines the definitional and measurement issues, and
how they affect our understanding of the scale and composition of the problem. Explanations for
homelessness have also been varied, and the second part of the course focuses on examining the
merits of some of those explanations, and in particular, the role of the affordable housing crisis. The
third section of the course focuses on the dynamics of homelessness, combining evidence from
ethnographic studies of how people become homeless and experience homelessness, with
quantitative research on the patterns of entry and exit from the condition. The final section of the
course turns to the approaches taken by policymakers and advocates to address the problem, and
considers the efficacy and quandaries associated with various policy strategies. The course concludes
by contemplating the future of homelessness research and public policy.
050. (AFST050, ANTH022, FOLK022, MUSC050) World Musics and Cultures. (C) Arts & Letters
Sector. All Classes. Muller, Rommen.
This course examines how we as consumers in the "Western" world engage with musical difference
largely through the products of the global entertainment industry. We examine music cultures in
contact in a variety of ways-- particularly as traditions in transformation. Students gain an
understanding of traditional music as live, meaningful person-to-person music making, by examining
the music in its original site of production, and then considering its transformation once it is removed,
and recontextualized in a variety of ways. The purpose of the course is to enable students to become
informed and critical consumers of "World Music" by telling a series of stories about particular
recordings made with, or using the music of, peoples culturally and geographically distant from the US.
Students come to understand that not all music downloads containing music from unfamiliar places
are the same, and that particular recordings may be embedded in intriguing and controversial
narratives of production and consumption. At the very least, students should emerge from the class
with a clear understanding that the production, distribution, and consumption of world music is rarely a
neutral process.
SM 056. (AFST056, COML056, MUSC056) South Africa: Contemporary Performance. (L) Muller.
The course begins with four two-hour online classes that provide an overview of South African music,
dance, and theater beginning two weeks before the festival. Students will be expected to post to blogs
and discussion forums about course materials, audio, video, and readings--provided online prior to
leaving for South Africa. These blogs and discussion materials will be fully integrated into the online
lectures. The Grahamstown Festival includes a wide range of events: we will focus on South African
jazz, gospel, and art music, with some discussion of dance and theater. All students will be required to
post daily to blogs and discussion forums while at the Festival. The class will conlcude with two days of
discussion, synthesis, and a final essay.

Page 4 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
070. (HIST070, LALS070) Colonial Latin America. History & Tradition Sector. All classes.
Farnsworth-Alvear, Walker. Fulfills History & Tradition Distribution Requirement
This course provides an introduction to the broad literature on Latin America s rich colonial history. We
will begin by tracing some of the early origins of - and points of contact between - the Indian, Iberian,
and African men and women who formed the basis of colonial society. As the course progresses, we
will explore the variety of ways in which colonial subjects lived, worked, ate, worshipped and
socialized. Lectures and reading assignments will draw upon a variety of sources, including court
cases, artistic renderings, city maps and street plans, travel accounts of visits to the region, and the
material, cultural, and intellectual products made possible by the wealth and dynamism of the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The course will conclude with an analysis of the Age of
Revolutions, a period of dramatic upheaval that remains at the center of lively scholarly debates. By
the end of the semester, students will be able to engage the key questions driving these debates, the
most important of which, perhaps, is: what is Latin America s colonial legacy?
071. (AFST071, ENGL071) Literatures of Africa and the African Diaspora. (M) Staff.
This course explores an aspect of the literature of Africa and the African Diaspora; specific course
topics will vary from year to year.
See the Africana Studies Department's webiste at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a description of
the current offerings.
075. (AFST075, HIST075) Africa Before 1800. (B) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Babou.
Survey of major themes and issues in African history before 1800. Topics include: early civilizations,
African kingdoms and empires, population movements, the spread of Islam,and the slave trade. Also,
emphasis on how historians use archaeology, linguistics, and oral traditions to reconstruct Africa's
early history.
079. (ENGL080) Literatures of Jazz. (M) Beavers.
That modernism is steeped as much in the rituals of race as of innovation is most evident in the
emergence of the music we have come to know as jazz, which results from collaborations and
confrontations taking place both across and within the color line. In this course we will look at jazz and
the literary representations it engendered in order to understand modern American culture. We will
explore a dizzying variety of forms, including autobiography and album liner notes, biography, poetry,
fiction, and cinema. We'll examine how race, gender, and class influenced the development of jazz
music, and then will use jazz music to develop critical approaches to literary form. Students are not
required to have a critical understanding of music. Class will involve visits from musicians and critics,
as well as field trips to some of Philadelphias most vibrant jazz venues.
Topics vary. See the Africana Studies Department's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a
description of the current offergings.
076. (AFST076, HIST076) Africa Since 1800. (A) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Cassanelli.
Survey of major themes, events, and personalities in African history from the early nineteenth century
through the 1960s. Topics include abolition of the slave trade, European imperialism, impact of colonial
rule, African resistance, religious and cultural movements, rise of naturalism and pan-Africanism,
issues of ethnicity, and "tribalisms" in modern Africa.

Page 5 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
077. (FOLK075, MUSC035) Jazz Style and History. (M) Ramsey.
This course is an exploration of the family of musical idioms called jazz. Attention will be given to
issues of style development, selective musicians, and to the social and cultural conditions and the
scholarly discourses that have informed the creation, dissemination and reception of this dynamic set
of styles from the beginning of the 20th century to the present.
SM 078. (HIST173, URBS178) Faculty-Student Collaborative Action Seminar in Urban
University-Community Relations. (C) Harkavy.
A primary goal of the seminar is to help students develop proposals as to how a Penn undergraduate
education might better empower students to produce, not simply "consume," societally-useful
knowledge, as well as function as caring, contributing citizens of a democratic society. Please note
new location of the class: The Netter Conference Room is on 111 South 38th Street, on the 2nd floor.
Among other responsibilities, students focus their community service on college and career
readiness at West Philadelphia High School and Sayre High School. Students are typically engaged in
academically based community service learning at the schools for two hours each week.
081. (ENGL081) African-American Literature. (M) Beavers, Davis, Tillet.
See the Africana Studies Department's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a description of
the current offerings.
084. (ENGL084) Theories of Race and Ethnicity. (M) Staff.
The idea of "race" -- broadly defined as the signification of biological and socio-cultural differences as
an index of human superiority or inferiority -- has played a crucial role in the literary imagination and is
fundamental to studying most literatures in English. This course will examine representations of race in
literary practices, and in particular the centrality of such representations to the historical unfolding of
communities and nations. How do ideas of race inform and engage with literary forms and genres in a
given historical moment, and how does literature in turn address the histories and legacies of racist
practices? We will also analyze the connenctions between questions of race and questions of
"ethnicity": what, for instance, is the history of this concept, and what does it mean to designate a body
of imaginative writing as an "ethnic literature?"
See the Africana Studies Departments's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a description
of the current offerings.
SM 100. (ARTH100) Intro to Art. (C) Du Bois Shaw. For Freshmen only
Topics Vary. See the Africana Studies Department's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a
description of the current offerings.
L/R 101. (CINE115, ENGL101, GSWS101) Study of an Author. (C) Arts & Letters Sector. All Classes.
Davis.
This is an introduction to literary study through the works of a single author--often Shakespeare, but
some versions of this course will feature other wirters. We will read several works and approach them-both in discussion and in writing--from a range of critical perspectives. The author's relation to his or
her time, to literary history generally, and to the problems of performance, the likely to be emphasized.
Some versions of this course will also serve as an introduction to other members of the English faculty,
who will visit the class as guest lecturers.
See the Africana Studies Department's website a https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a description of
the current offerings.

Page 6 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
106. (COML104, ENGL104) Study of a Literary Period. (C) Davis.
This is an introduction to literary study through a survey of works from a specific historical period.
Some verions will begin with traditional stories or poems, including a sampling of works in translation.
Others will focus exclusively on modern and contemporary American short fiction or poetry.
See the Africana Studies Department's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a description of
the current offerings.
108. (CINE112, COML245, ENGL102) Study of a Literary Theme. (C) Jaji.
Study of a Literary Theme- For many of us, the first experience of travel is imaginary, through the
portal of a novel, film, or memoir. This course combinesthese narratives of travel and stories of coming
of age. At the center of our exploration will the contemporary rise of Study Abroad programs in U.S.
universities. We'll place this in historical context as we consider how cross-cultural encounters have
been portrayed, with particular attention to authors of color from the U.S. and the global South. No
previous travel experience is assumed other than imaginative; this course is open to students,
freshman to senior, from all majors -- especially the undeclared. Materials well consider together
include selections from Don Quixote (the adventures of a knight errant and his servant in Spain by
Miguel Cervantes), James Baldwin (an African American in Switzerland and France), Samuel Selvon
(a Trinidadian in the UK), Faith Adiele (a Nigerian-American in Burma), Amitav Ghosh (an Indian in
Egypt) and Kiana Davenport (a Hawaiian in France). These readings will be complemented by films
including two versions of Around the World in in Eighty Days, The Motorcycle Diaries, Roman Holiday
and Touki Bouki. Assignments will include regular journal entries and 2 essays.
112. (GSWS114, SOCI112, URBS114) Discrimination: Sexual and Racial Conflict. (B) Society
Sector. All classes. Madden.
This course is concerned with the structure, the causes and correlates, and the government policies to
alleviate discrimination by race and gender in the United States.The central focus of the course is on
employment differences by race and gender and the extent to which they arise from labor market
discrimination versus other causes, although racial discrimination in housing is also considered. After
a comprehensive overview of the structures of labor and housing markets and of nondiscriminatory
reasons (that is, the cumulative effects of past discrimination and/or experiences) for the existence of
group differentials in employment, wages and residential locations, various theories ofthe sources of
current discrimination are reviewed and evaluated. Actual government policies and alternatives
policies are evaluated in light of both the empirical evidence on group differences and the alternative
theories of discrimination.
SM 114. (ENGL113) Poetry Writing Workshop. (A) Beavers. This course is not open to freshmen.
Students wishing to take this course must submit a writing sample as part of the selection process.
This workshop is intended to help students with prior experience writing poetry develop techniques to
generate poems along with the critical tools necessary to revise and complete them. Through in-class
exercises, weekly writing assignments, readings of established poets, and class critique, students will
acquire an assortment of resources that will help them develop a more concrete sense of voice,
rhythm, metaphor, and the image as well as a deeper understanding of how these things come
together to make a successful poem. In addiiton to weekly writings, students will be asked to keep a
journal, and to produce a final portfolio of poems.

Page 7 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
115. (RELS112) Religious Ethics and Modern Society. (C) Butler.
Religious beliefs of Malcolm X and MLK formed their social action during the Civil Rights for African
Americans. This seminar will explore the religious religious biographies of each leader, how religion
shaped their public and private personas, and the transformative and transgressive role that religion
played in the history of the Civil Rights movement in the United States and abroad. Students in this
course will leave with a clearer understanding of religious beliefs of Christianity, The Nation of Islam,
and Islam, as well as religiously based social activism. Other course emphases include the public and
private roles of religion within the context of the shaping of ideas of freedom, democracy, and equality
in the United States, the role of the "Black church" in depicting messages of democracy and freedom,
and religious oratory as exemplified through MLK and Malcolm X.
See Africana Studies Department's wbsite at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a description of the
current offerings.
117. (ENGL016, RELS117) African American Religion. (C) Butler.
The unique history and experiences of African Americans can be traced through religion and belief.
Through the mediums of literature, politics, music, and film, students will plore the religious
experiences of people of the African Diaspora within the context of the complex history of race in
American history. The course will cover a broad spectrum of African American religious experience
including Black Nationalism, urban religions, the "black church" and African religious traditions such as
Santeria and Rastafarianism. Special attention will be paid to the role of race, gender, sexuality, and
popular culture in the African American religious experience.
L/R 120. (SOCI120) Social Statistics. (C) Charles.
This course offers a basic introduction to the application/interpretation of statistical analysis in
sociology. Upon completion, you should be familiar with a variety of basic statistical techniques that
allow examination of interesting social questions. We begin by learning to describe the characteristics
of groups, followed by a discussion of how to examine and generalize about relationships between the
characteristics of groups. Emphasis is placed on the understanding/interpretation of statistics used to
describe and make generalizations about group characteristics. In addition to hand calculations, you
will also become familiar with using PCs to run statistical tests.
140. (AFST140) Elementary Zulu I in Residence. (A) Mbeje. OBJECTIVE: Attainment of Level 1
(ceiling) in speaking, listening, reading, and writing skills on the Interagency Language Roundtable
(ILR) scale.
This elementary course is for beginners and it requires no prior knowledge of Zulu. The course will
expose students to the Zulu language and culture and will be based in the National Standards for
Foreign Language Learning. Students will be engaged in communicative language learning through
interpersonal, interpretive and presentational modes of language learning techniques. They will gain
knowledge and understanding of the Zulu culture. They will use their Zulu language and culture
learning experience to connect with other disciplines and further their knowledge of these disciplines
through perspectives acquired from their Zulu class. They will also develop insight into the nature of
language and culture through comparisons of the Zulu language and culture and their own. Through
movies, songs, and other cultural activities online students will acquire the natural use of the language
which will enable them to acquire linguistic and cultural skill to become life-long learners who can
participate in Zulu communities in the U.S. and overseas.

Page 8 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
SM 121. (ENGL121) Writing for Children. (C) Cary. This course is not open to freshmen. Students
wishing to take this course must submit a writing sample as part of the selection process. May be
repeated for credit with a different instructor.
We will read our favorite kids' books, determine the kinds of books we love to read and write, and then
write them, aiming at a clear voice appropriate to the story, and as much order or misrule as each
writer's kid-muse demands. For inspiration, we'll visit the Maurice Sendak Collection at the Rosenbach
Museum and Library and have a nostalgia wallow in the kids' section at the library. Then students
write, fast-fast, drafts of stories to workshop , mull and revise. Yes, fun is required. For sure we'll
critique, but first we'll try to outrun our interior grown-up! Workshopping happens first with student
writer colleagues, and then with the real kids in schools, through our partner West Philadelphia
Alliance for Children. Reading to children will give studentwriters a chance to hear where children
laugh, see where they look scared, or notice when they begin to fidget. Returning with revisions will be
a promise fulfilled, and an important marker in the literary life of everyone involved. Our class will act
as a team of editors, then, to submit stories-andillustrations by authors and/or kids-on the upcoming
website, SafeKidsStories.org.
SM 134. (ENGL135) Creative Non-Fiction Writing. (C) Cary.
This class is designed to advance students' writing practice, discipline, and workshop and critiquing
skills. Student writers will create non-fiction narrative in several forms: blogs, memoir, interviews,
Q&As, essays. We will play with promotion, video, and social marketing, even grant proposals,
advertisements, public service announcements, queries, and photo captions -all the forms that writers
actually use throughout careers of deep reflection followed by hustle-and-pitch. The class will act as an
editorial group for SafeKidsStories.org, a site to be launched in the fall of 2015. The idea is to depict
safety with the specificity and drama that we usually reserve for conflict. Your writing will explore Big
Questions about the social, emotional, relational and physical structures that affect our children and
youth ; your research, interviews, reporting, and experience will discover and share solutions. If we do
the job right, we will shine a light on people inour midst creating structures of safety for kids in an era
of fear. If we make it fun to read, look at, and listen to, too, then, like a few historic college courses that
participate substantively in their communities, we'll be on our way to stealth culture change.
135. (AFST135, SOCI135) Law and Society. (C) Fetni.
After introducing students to the major theoretical concepts concerning law and society, significant
controversial societal issues that deal with law and the legal systems both domestically and
internationally will be examined. Class discussions will focus on issues involving civil liberties, the
organization of courts, legislatures, the legal profession and administrative agencies. Although the
focus will be on law in the United States, law and society in other countries of Africa, Asia, Europe and
Latin America will be covered in a comparative context. Readings include research, reports, statutes
and cases.
147. (FOLK106, MUSC235) Studies in African American Music. (M) Ramsey.
This course explores aspects of the origins, style development, aesthetic philosophies, historiography,
and contemporary conventions of African-American musical traditions. Topics covered include: the
music of West and Central Africa, the music of colonial America, 19th century church and dance
music, minstrelsy, music of the Harlem Renaissance, jazz, blues, gospel, hip-hop, and film music.
Special attention is given to the ways that black music produces "meaning" and to how the social
energy circulating within black music articulates myriad issues about American identity at specific
histroical moments. The course will also engage other expressive art forms from visual and literary
sources in order to better position music making into the larger framework of African American
aesthetics.

Page 9 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
160. (LING160) Introduction to Afro-American and Latino English. (A) Labov.
An introduction to the use and structure of dialects of English used by the African American and Latino
communities in the United States. It is an academically based service learning course. The field work
component involves the study of the language and culture of everyday life and the application of this
knowledge to programs for raising the reading levels of elementary school children.
L/R 172. (HIST170) The American South. (C) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Hahn.
This course will cover southern culture and history from 1607-1860, from Jamestown to secession. It
traces the rise of slavery and plantation society, the growth of Southern sectionalism and its explosion
into Civil War.
SM 167. (AFST167, HIST167, URBS167) THE NEW AFRICAN DIASPORA: AFRICAN IMMIGRANT
LIVES IN WEST PHILADELPHIA. Cassanelli.
This seminar will examine the experiences of recent African immigrants and refugees in Philadelphia
in an historical framework. We will employ a variety of sources-newspapers, census data, legal briefs,
literature and film, and diaspora internet sites-to explore the lives, aspirations, and perceptions of
Philadelphia's African residents. There will be opportunities for dialogue with high school students,
teachers, and parents; with representatives of African community and business organizations; and with
local government and service agencies. Students will be required to do a final project which involves
volunteering with an African immigrant non-profit or business and/or conducting focused research on
specific African communities in Philadelphia.
168. (HIST168) History of American Law to 1877. (A) Berry.
This course surveys the development of law in the U.S. to 1877, including such subjects as: the
evolution of the legal profession, the transformation of English law during the American Revolution, the
making and implementation of the Constitution, and issues concerning business and economic
development, the law of slavery, the status of women, and civil rights.
169. (HIST169) History of American Law Since 1877. (B) Berry.
This course covers the development of legal rules and principles concerning individual and group
conduct in the United States since 1877. Such subjects as regulation and deregulation, legal
education and the legal profession, and the legal status of women and minorities will be discussed.
175. (HIST175, LALS175) Society and Culture of Brazil. Walker.
With its booming economy, the recent inauguration of its first female president, and its selection as
host to the 2012 World Cup and Olympic games, Brazil is growing in global prestige. But amid all these
exciting developments are devastating socioeconomic inequalities. Access to safe living conditions,
livable wages, higher education, and overall social mobility remain painfully out of reach to many
Brazilians, the majority of whom are the descendants of slaves. Why do these problems persist in a
country that has had such an enduring and widespread reputation as a "racial democracy"? What are
the possibilities of closing the equality gap in Brazil?

Page 10 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
176. (HIST176) Afro-American History 1550-1876. (D) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Akins,
Williams.
This course will study the history of African-Americans from their first encounter with Europeans in the
16th century to their emancipation during the Civil War. This course will concentrate on the variety of
black responses to capture, enslavement, and forced acculturation in the New World. the difference in
the slave experience of various New World countries, and the methods of black resistance and
rebellion to varied slave systems will be investigated. The nature and role of the free black
communities in antebellum American will also be studied.
177. (HIST177) Afro-American History 1876 to Present. (C) History & Tradition Sector. All classes.
Harris, Savage.
A study of the major events, issues, and personalities in Afro-American history from Reconstruction to
the present. The course will also examine the different slave experiences and the methods of black
resistance and rebellion in the various slave systems.
190. (AFST190, ANTH190, HIST190) Introduction to Africa. (A) Society Sector. All classes. Hasty.
During the semester we will focus on people and communities of sub-Saharan Africa and on the ways
people represent, reflect on, and react to various aspects and issues in their lives and the institutions
which dominate their communities. We will focus particularly on the history, contemporary expression,
and inter-relationships among politics, religion, and aesthetic practice. Members of Penn's African
Studies community will share their expertise with the class and introduce the University's Africa
resources. Texts consist of weekly readings, films, and recordings; and class members will be
expected to attend several lectures outside of class.
SM 206. (HIST206) Major Seminar of the World after 1800. (C) Babou.
This course is cross-listed with HIST 206 (Major Seminar of the World after 1800) when the subject
matter is related to African, African American, or other African Diaspora issues. A frequent topic is
"African Intellectual History."
See the Africana Studies Department's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a description of
the current offerings.
209. (AFST209, ARTH209) African Art. (M) Staff.
This selective survey will examine a variety of the circumstances of sub-Saharan African art, ranging
from imperial to nomadic cultures and from ancient times to comtemporary participation in the
international market. Iconography, themes and style will be considered, as will questions of modernity,
religious impact, tradition and colonialism.
218. (LGST218) Race, Racism and American Law. (C) Anderson.
The goal of this course is to study the role the law has played, and continues to play, in addressing the
problems of racial discrimination in the United States. Contemporary issues such as racial profiling,
affirmative action, and diversity will all be covered in their social and legal context. The basis for
discussion will be assigned texts, articles, editorials and cases. In addition, interactive videos will also
be used to aid class discussion. Course requirements will include a term paper and class
presentations.

Page 11 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
SM 231. (AFST231, CINE210, FREN231) Cinema Francophone. (M) Moudileno.
This course will introduce students to recent films by major directors from Francophone Africa. While
attention will be given to aesthetic aspects and individual creativity, the viewing and discussions will be
mostly organized around a variety of (overlapping) themes: History; Tradition/Modernity; Urban Life;
Gender and Sexuality; Politics. Class conducted in French.
222. (AFST221, GSWS222) African Women's Lives: Past and Present. (M) Blakley.
Restoring women to African history is a worthy goal, but easier said than done.The course examines
scholarship over the past forty years that brings to light previously overlooked contributions African
women have made to political struggle, religious change, culture preservation, and economic
development from pre-colonial times to present. The course addresses basic questions about
changing women's roles and human rights controversies associated with African women within the
wider cultural and historical contexts in which their lives are lived. It also raises fundamental questions
about sources, methodology, and representation, including the value of African women's oral and
written narrative and cinema production as avenues to insider perspectives on African women's lives.
225. (AFST225) African Languages and Culture. (C) Mbeje.
The aim of the course is to provide an overall perspective on African languages and linguistics. No
background in linguistics is necessary. Students will be introduced to theoretical linguistics-its
concepts, theories, ways of argumentation, data collection, data analysis, and data interpretation. The
focus will be on the languages and linguistics of Africa to provide you with the knowledge and skills
required to handle the language and language-related issues typical of African conditions. We will
cover topics related to formal linguistics (phonology/phonetics, morphology, syntax, and semantics),
aspects of pragmatics as well as the general socio-linguistic character of African countries. We will
also cover language in context, language and culture, borrowing, multilingualism, and cross-cultural
communication in Africa.
SM 230. (AFRC533, SOCI230, SOCI530) Special Topics in Sociology. (C) Charles, Zuberi, Roberts.
This course is cross-listed with SOCI 430 (Special Topics in Sociology) when the subject matter is
related to African, African American, or other African Diaspora issues.
Topics vary. Recent courses offered include "Africana Urbanization," Race Relations in American
Cities," and "Sociology of the Black Community." SPRING 2015: Race, Science and Society - What is
the role of the life sciences in shaping our understanding of race? How has racial stratification
influenced scientists and how have scientists constructed racial difference and helped to maintain or
contest racial inequities in society? This seminar draws on an interdisciplinary body of biological and
social scientific literature to explore the connections between race, science, and society in the United
States from the eighteenth century to the current genomic age. After laying a historical foundation, we
will focus on the recent expansion of genomic research and technologies that treat race as a biological
category that can be identified at the molecular level, including race-specific pharmaceuticals,
commercial ancestry testing, and racial profiling with DNA forensics. We will discuss the significance of
this increase in race consciousness in genomic research and technology at a time when
colorblindness and post-racialism are gaining popularity. Students will investigate further specific
topics related to race, genetics, and biotechnologies in their research papers.

Page 12 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
L/R 232. (PSCI231) Race and Ethnic Politics. (M) Gillion.
This course examines the role of race and ethnicity in the political discourse through a comparative
survey of recent literature on the historical and contemporary political experiences of the four major
minority groups (Blacks or African Americans, American Indians, Latinos or Hispanic Americans, and
Asian Americans). A few of the key topics will include assimilation and acculturation seen in the Asian
American community, understanding the political direction of Black America in a pre and post Civil
Rights era, and assessing the emergence of Hispanics as the largest minority group and the political
impact of this demographnic change. Throughout the semester, the course will introduce students to
significant minority legislation, political behavior, social movements, litigation/court ruling, media and
various forms of public opinion that have shaped the history of racial and ethnic minority relations in
this country. Readings are drawn from books and articles written by contemporary political scientists.
235. (SOCI235) Law and Social Change. (C) Fetni.
Beginning with discussion of various perspectives on social change and law, this course then
examines in detail the interdependent relationship between changes in legal and societal institutions.
Emphasis will be placed on (1) how and when law can be an instrument for social change, and (2) how
and when social change can cause legal change. In the assessment of this relationship, emphasis will
be on the laws of the United States. However, laws of other countries and international law relevant to
civil liberties, economic, social and political progress will be studied. Throughout the course,
discussions will include legal controversies relevant to social change such as issues of race, gender
and the law. Other issues relevant to State-Building and development will be discussed. A comparative
framework will be used in the analysis of this interdependent relationship between law and social
change.
SM 237. UNDERGRAD RESEARCH SEM. (B)
L/R 252. (SOCI252) Human Rights. (M) Zuberi.
Sociology provides a unique way to look at human behavior and the world. We live in a world of
diverse and conflicting values in which human rights and respect for human dignity have provided a
platform for convergence. One important instance of such convergence has been the development of
international norms prohibiting genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and ethnic cleansing.
While there is agreement on fundemental principles as reflected in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, differences in interpretation remain. A platform for convergence requires the
engagement of a number of constituencies, in particular, state and inter-state entities, corporations,
civil society and individuals, as well as the mutual reinforcement of their rights and duties. This course
will critically cover the history, practice and social significance of human rights.
257. (AFST257, PSCI210) Contemporary African Politics. (C) Staff.
A survey of politics in Africa focusing on the complex relationships between state, society, the
economy, and external actors. It will cover colonial rule, the independence struggle, authoritarian and
democratic statecraft, international debt, economic development, military rule, ethnicity, and class.

Page 13 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
258. (ANTH256, FOLK259, LALS258, MUSC257, MUSC258) Caribbean Music and Diaspora. (M)
Rommen.
This course considers Caribbean musics within a broad and historical framework.Caribbean musical
practices are explored by illustrating the many ways that aesthetics, ritual, communication, religion,
and social structure are embodied in and contested through performance. These initial inquiries open
onto an investigation of a range of theoretical concepts that become particularly pertinent in Caribbean
contexts--concepts such as post-colonialism, migration, ethnicity, hybridity, syncretism, and
globalization. Each of these concepts, moreover, will be explored with a view toward understanding its
connections to the central analytical paradigm of the course--diaspora. Throughout the course, we will
listen to many different styles and repertories of music ranging from calpso to junkanoo, from rumba to
merengue, and from dance hall to zouk. We will then work to understand them not only in relation to
the readings that frame our discussions but also in relation to our own North-American contexts of
music consumption and production.
268. (AFST268, SOCI268) Contemporary Issues in the African Society. Imoagene, Zuberi.
This course will deal with law and society in Africa. After surveying the various legal systems in Africa,
the focus will be on how and to what extent the countries of Africa "re-Africanized" their legal systems
by reconciling their indigenous law with western law and other legal traditions to create unified legal
systems that are used as instruments of social change and development. Toward this end, the
experiences of various African countries covering the various legal traditions will be included. Specific
focus will be on laws covering both economic and social relations. This emphasis includes laws of
contracts and civil wrongs, land law, law of succession, marriage and divorce and Africa's laws of
International Relations, among other laws. Throughout this course a comparative analysis with nonAfrican countries will be stressed.
269. (PSCI271) Constitutional Law: Public Power & Civil Rights to 1912. (C) Smith.
This course explores the creation and transformations of the American constitutional system's
structures and goals from the nation's founding through the period of Progressive reforms, the rise of
the Jim Crow system, and the Spanish American War. Issues include the division of powers between
state and national governments, and the branches of the federal government; economic powers of
private actors and government regulators; the authority of governments to enforce or transform racial
and gender hierarchies; and the extent of religious and expressive freedoms and rights of persons
accused of crimes. We will pay special attention to the changing role of the Supreme Court and its
decisions in interpreting and shaping American constitutionalism, and we will also read legislative and
executive constitutional arguments, party platforms, and other influential statements of American
constitutional thought.
SM 276. (ENGL271) Topics In the Literature of Africa and the African Diaspora. (M) Staff. Spaces
will be reserved for English Majors
This course explores an aspect of the literature of Africa and the African Diaspora intensively; specific
course topics will vary from year to year.
See the Africana Studies Department's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a description of
the current offerings.

Page 14 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
SM 281. (COML325, ENGL281, GSWS281) Topics in African American Literature. (M) Beavers,
Davis, Jackson, Tillet. Spaces will be reserved for English Majors.
In this advanced seminar, students will be introduced to a variety of approaches to African American
literatures, and to a wide spectrum of methodologies and ideological postures (for example, The Black
Arts Movement). The course will present an assortment of emphases, some of them focused on
geography (for example, the Harlem Renaissance), others focused on genre (autobiography, poetry or
drama), the politics of gender and class, or a particular grouping of authors. Previous versions of this
course have included "African American Autobigraphy," "Backgrounds of African American Literature,"
"The Black Narrative" (beginning with eighteenth century slave narratives and working toward
contemporary literature), as well as seminars on urban spaces, jazz, migration, oral narratives, black
Christianity, and African-American music. See Africana Studies Department's website at https://
africana.sas.upenn.edu for a description of the current offerings.
SM 283. (AFST283, ENGL271) Topics in Anglophone African Literature. (M) Staff.
This course explores an aspect of the literature of Africa and the African Diaspora intensively; specific
course topics will vary from year to year.
See the Africana Studies Department's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a description of
the current offerings.
SM 301. (AFST301) Africa and the African Diaspora. (M) Staff.
This course will take the form of an introductory seminar designed to provide undergraduate students
an overview of significant themes and issues focusing on the historical, political, and cultural
relationships between Africans and their descendants abroad. It will encompass: a review of different
historical periods and geographical locations, from Ancient Egypt to modern American, Caribbean and
African states; a critical evaluation of social movements and theories that have developed in the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries among scholars of different origins in their attempt to reconstruct
Africa as a center and the Diaspora as a specific cultural space; and, an exploration of representation
of Africa and the Diaspora in canonical literary works and other forms of fiction like the visual arts.
294. (ARTH274, ARTH674, ASAM294, CINE293, LALS294) Facing America. (M) Shaw.
This course explores the visual history of race in the United States as both self-fashioning and cultural
mythology by examing the ways that conceptions of Native American, Latino,and Asian identity,
alongside ideas of Blackness and Whiteness, have combined to create the various cultural ideologies
of class, gender, and sexuality that remain evident in historical visual and material culture. We will also
investigate the ways that these creations have subsequently helped to launch new visual
entertainments, inclduing museum spectacles, blackface minstrelsy, and early film, from the colonial
period through the 1940s.
SM 296. (ARTH293, CINE295, COML295, ENGL295) Topics in Cultural Studies. (M) Decherney,
Brar.
Blackness Across Media - How is blackness produced, disseminated and received across sonic, visual
and written media? It is understood as a racial category, a cultural aesthetic, or a politics? Can it ever
be considered a color amongst other colors? This course is situated at the conceptually unstable but
intellectually productive intersection of sound, optics and text. It seeks to use this intersection to
speculate on the question of blackness within media, artistic and political practice. The intention is
interrogate how the category of blackness animates and disrupts many of the sensory experiences of
the world within global capitalism.

Page 15 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
SM 303. (ARTH301, CINE300, ENGL294) Undergraduate Seminar. (M) Shaw. Undergraduate Major
Preference
Topic varies. This course is cross-listed with ARTH 301 (Undergraduate Seminar) when the subject
matter is related to African, African American, or other African Diaspora issues.
See the Africana Studies Department's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a description of
the current offerings.
SM 308. (FOLK310, RELS310, URBS310) Religious Diversity in America. (M) Butler. This course is
cross-listed with RELS 310 (Religious Diversity in America) when the subject matter is related to
African, African American, or other African Diaspora issues. A recent topic is Religious Diversity and
Social Change in West Philadelphia.
SPRING 2015 TOPIC: American Jesus - Images and beliefs about Jesus have always been a
compelling part of American life. This course seeks to examine the social, political, religious and
artistic ways that Jesus has been appropriated and used in American life, making him a unique figure
for exploring American religious life. Special attention will be given to how Jesus is used to shape
social and political concerns, including race, gender, sexuality, and culture.
See the Africana Studies Department's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a description of
the current offerings.
SM 310. Sustainable Development in Ghana. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Participation in the
International Development Summer Institute (IDSI).
This course is mandatory for students participating in the International Development Summer Institute
(IDSI). IDSI is a service learning and training program for undergraduates that provides students with
the opportunity to have an applied learning and cultural experience in Ghana. The program consists of
5 weeks of pre-program preparation at Penn and a 4-week long training program on the campus of
Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology (KNUST) in Kumasi, Ghana. More Info: http://
www.seas.upenn.edu/undergraduate/service-learn/idsi/index.php
SM 322. (HIST322) AMERICAN SLAVERY AND THE LAW. (B) WILLIAMS.
In this course, we will work both chronologically and thematically to examine laws, constitutional
provisions, and local and federal court decisions that established, regulated, and perpetuated slavery
in the American colonies and states. We will concern ourselves both with change over time in the
construction and application of the law, and the persistence of the desire to control and sublimate
enslaved people. Our work will include engagement with secondary sources as well as immersion in
the actual legal documents. Students will spend some time working with Mississippi murder cases
from the 19th century. They will decipher and transcribe handwritten trial transcripts, and will historicize
and analyze the cases with attention to procedural due process as well as what the testimony can tell
us about the social history of the counties in which the murders occurred. The course will end with an
examination of Black Codes that southern states enacted when slavery ended.
346. (GSWS346, HIST346) Gender in Modern American History. (B) Brown, Peiss.
This course explores how immigration, industrialization, racial segregation, and the growing authority
of science transformed the fundamental conditions of women's lives in the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries. Building on previous effforts by female reformers to perfect society, women at the
turn of the century organized large social movements dedicated to improving the lives of women and
children and gaining public access to political power. We will examine the fruits of this activism as well
as the consequences of subsequent events for the rise of several important social movements in the
latter half of the century -- including civil rights, women's liberation, and gay rights -- in which women
played a vital role. The course concludes with an assessment of feminism in the present day, with
special emphasis on the responses of younger women to its legacy.

Page 16 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
SM 325. (ENGL280) Performance in the African Diaspora. (C) Berger. Formerly AFRC 3O9. Writing
Out Loud.
The purpose of this course is to engage students in the rigorous process of mining experiences for
material that can be transformed into a public performance piece. In-class writing, group discussions,
and field work in the Philadelphia area. Fall 2015 Topic: AUGUST WILSON - The people need to know
the story. See how they fit into it. See what part they play. - August Wilson, King Hedley II. In this
seminar, students will read groundbreaking playwright August Wilson's 20th Century Cycle: ten plays
that form an iconic picture of African American traumas, triumphs, and traditions through the decades,
told through the lens of Pittsburgh's Hill District neighborhood. Other readings include supporting
material on Wilson's work and African American theatre, the works of contemporary playwrights whom
Wilson has influenced (such as Suzan-Lori Parks and Tarell Alvin McCraney), and context on Penn's
relationship with West Philadelphia.
As an Academically Based Community Service (ABCS) course,this seminar gives students the
opportunity to enhance their understanding of the plays, and history and culture that shaped them, by
forming meaningful relationships with West Philadelphia residents. Wilson's plays provide the bridge
between the two groups. The course culminates with students writing an original theatre piece inspired
by the readings and relationships, which they will share at an end-of-semester performance.
SM 326. (GSWS326) Theories in Gender and Sexuality Studies. (A) Keirbeck.Prerequisite(s): A
prior course in gender, sexuality and women's studies.
FALL 2015: QUEER VALUES - What are queer cultural experiences and values? Many academics and
social movements have noted that the radical aspirations of queer theory and activism not only disrupt
but also shore up neoliberal ideologies. In this course students will explore the historical co-emergence
of queer cultures and neoliberalism by examining the promises and pitfalls of queer politics over the
past quarter century. The coining of queer theory by Theresa de Lauretis in 1990 was intended as a
disruptive joke. Its provocation resided in joining queer, an appropriation of street slang bandied about
among New York City activists and artists in the 1980s, to theory, the passport of privilege in academic
life. The irreverence of her joke exemplifies a central ethic of queer experience that renders palpable
the tensions between margins and centers. The course will traverse scholarship from economic and
queer anthropology, history, sociology & science studies, philosophy, political theory and literary
studies.
This wide survey of literature will allow students to develop an understanding of the political and
economic processes that have conditioned the emergence of queerness as a diverse range of ethical
commitments in particular sociocultural contexts globally. Students will investigate the affective
dimensions of the emergence of queer theory, studies and activism within the United States and
elsewhere in the context of global neoliberal social reforms. The course is split into four units: 1) In the
Place of Queer Origins; 2) Queer Values; 3) Queer Circulations and Subjectivities; and 4) Queer
Temporalities.
345. (HIST345) Race and Sex in Early America. (A) Brown.
This course explores the lost worlds of sinners, witches, sexual offenders, rebellious slaves, and
Native American prophets from the seventeenth to nineteenth centuries. Using the life stories of
unusual individuals from the past, we try to make sense of their contentious relationships with their
societies. By following the careers of the trouble-makers, the criminals, and the rebels, we also learn
about the foundations of social order and the impulse to reform that rocked American society during
the nineteenth century.
SM 352. (ENGL353) Topics In 19th-Century American Literature. (M) Davis. Formerly ENGL 383.
Benjamin Franklin Seminar
This course explores an aspect of 19th-Century American literature intensively; specific course topics
will vary from year to year.

Page 17 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
363. (HIST363) The Civil War and Reconstruction. (B) Staff.
This course investigates the major ingredients - political, social, and economic - leading to the
sectional crisis and war, analyzes war and leadership on both sides, and explores the major issues of
Reconstruction.
SM 371. (ENGL371) Topics in the Literature of Africa and the African Diaspora. (M) Staff.
Benjamin Franklin Seminar
This course explores an aspect of the literature of Africa and the African Diaspora intensively; specific
course topics will vary from year to year.
See the Africana Studies Department's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a description of
the current offerings.
SM 391. (AFST390, FREN390) Survey Francophone Literature. (M) Moudileno.
A brief introduction about the stages of French colonialism and its continuing political and cultural
consequences, and then reading in various major works --novels, plays, poems -- in French by authors
from Quebec, the Caribbean, Africa (including the Maghreb),etc. of interest to majors in International
Relations, Anthropology and African Studies as well as majors in French. Taught in French.
SM 372. (AFST373, HIST371, HIST412) Africa & the Mid-East. (C) Eve Troutt Powell, Young.
This seminar will explore the historical relationship between these two regions from the early modern
age to the present. We will examine the history of trade, particularly the slave trade, and its cultural
and political legacy. We will compare the experiences of European imperalism--how the scramble for
Africa dovetailed with the last decades of the Ottoman Empire--with an eye to how this shaped
nationalist movements in both regions. The course will also explore the decades of independence with
a special eye towards pan-Africanism and pan-Arabism. We will also study the ramifications of the
Arab-Israeli conflict on the relationship between African and Middle-Eastern countries, from Uganda to
Ethopia, from OPEC to Darfur. This course will pay close attention to migrations through the regions,
whether forced or economic or religious. Whenever possible we will explore, through film and literature,
how people in Africa and the Middle East see their connections, and their differences.
SM 381. (ENGL381) Topics in African American Literature. (M) Staff. Benjamin Franklin Seminar
In this advanced seminar, students will be introduced to a variety of approaches to African American
literatures, and to a wide spectrum of methodologies and ideological postures (for example, The Black
Arts Movement). The course will present an assortment of emphases, some of them focused on
geography (for example, The Harlem Renaissance), others focused on genre (autobiography, poetry or
drama), the politics of gender and class, or a particular grouping of authors. Previous versions of this
course have included "African American Autobiography," "Backgrounds of African American
Literatures," "The Black Narrative" (beginning with eighteenth century slave narratives and working
toward contemporary literature), as well as seminars on urban spaces, jazz, migration, oral narratives,
black Christianity, and African-American music.
See the Africana Studies Department's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a description of
the current offerings.

Page 18 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
SM 387. (COMM387, GSWS387, HIST387, LALS387, SOCI340) Topics in Africana Studies. (C)
Osuji, Sanders-Johnson, Willis.
Topics vary: Black Feminist Approaches to History & Memory - The term black feminism emerged in
public discourse amid the social, political, and cultural turbulence of the 1960s. The roots of black
feminism, however, are much older, easily reaching back to the work of black women abolitionists and
social critics of the nineteenth century. The concept continued to grow and evolve in the work of
twentieth century black women writers, journalists, activists, and educators as they sought to
document black women's lives. Collectively, their work established black feminism as a political
practice dedicated to the equality of all people. More recently, black feminism has been deployed as a
tool for theoretical and scholarly analysis that is characterized by an understanding that race, class,
gender, and sexuality are inextricably interconnected.
Using materials such as slave narratives, social criticism, and archival sources, this course will
explore the theoretical and practical applications of black feminist thought in nineteenth and twentieth
century North American culture and politics. In particular, we will consider the symbols and practices
(storytelling, myth-making, art, archival research) that black women use to document lives. We will ask:
how do these methods of documentation inform our understanding of the past and the production of
historical knowledge? How can we understand black feminism as both theory and practice? And what
are the implications of black feminist approaches for current research and scholarship? We will give
particular attention to concepts such as gender, race, memory, the archive, and embodied knowledge
to complicate our understanding of historical documentation, epistemology, and authenticity. The
course material will include scholarship by Harriet Jacobs, Audre Lorde, Saidiya Hartman, Hazel
Carby, Hershini Young, Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham, Toni Morrison, and others. (Image: From In
Praise of Shadows, Kara Walker (2009).
See the Africana Studies Department's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a description of
the current offerings.
SM 392. (ARTH389, CINE392, COML391, ENGL392, SLAV392) Topics in Cinema Studies. (M)
Staff.
This topics course explores aspects of Cinema Studies intensively. Specific course topics vary from
year to year.
See the Africana Studies Department's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a description of
the current offerings.
SM 400. (CINE370) Seminar in Africana Studies. (C) Bogle.
This course is an examination and analysis of the changing images and achievements of African
Americans in motion pictures and television. The first half of the course focuses on African-American
film images from the early years of D.W. Griffith's "renegade bucks" in The Birth of a Nation (1915); to
the comic servants played by Steppin Fetchit, Hattie McDaniel, and others during the Depression era;
to the post-World War II New Negro heroes and heroines of Pinky (1949) and The Defiant Ones
(1958); to the rise of the new movement of African American directors such as Spike Lee (Do the
Right Thing), Julie Dash (Daughters of the Dust), Charles Burnett, (To Sleep With Anger) and John
Singleton (Boyz N the Hood). The second half explores television images from the early sitcoms
"Amos 'n Andy" and "Beulah" to the "Cosby Show," "Fresh Prince of Bel Air," and "Martin." Foremost
this course will examine Black stereotypes in American films and television--and the manner in which
those stereotypes have reflected national attitudes and outlooks during various historical periods. The
in-class screenings and discussions will include such films as Show Boat (1936), the independently
produced "race movies" of the 1930s and 1940s, Cabin in the Sky (1943), The Defiant Ones (1958),
Imitation of Life (the 1959 remake) & Super Fly (1972).

Page 19 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
SM 435. (PSCI434) MODERN PRESIDENCY & RACE. (M) GILLION.
This seminar is designed to serve as a "capstone" experience for advanced undergrduates interested
in American politics. It exposes students to some of the issues currently being studied and debated by
the leading scholars in the field. For each topic we will read works that take competing or opposing
positions on an issue; for example we will examine the current controversy over the causes and and
consequences of divided government. Students will write a research paper analyzing one of the
debates.
SM 431. (AFRC531, AFRC630, SOCI430, SOCI630) Advanced Special Topics in Sociology. (M)
Charles, Zuberi.
This course is cross-listed with SOCI 430 (Advanced Topics in Sociology) when the subject matter is
related to African, African American, or other African Diaspora issues. Recent courses offered include
"Race, Colonialism and Methods," "Residential Segregation," and Race, Space and Inequality.
See the Africana Studies Department's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a description of
the current offerings.
SM 433. (PSCI433) Social Movement. (C) Gillion.
Social movements and political protest have become some of the most effective tools for citizens and
non-citizens to influence the political system. This course is designed to introduce students to the
theoretical and methodological approaches taken in understanding these behaviors. Analyzing social
movements that range from civil discontent to contentious political protest, the course will address a
variety of questions: What is the origin of movement behavior and why do individuals turn to these
actions in lieu of simply engaging in institutional modes of political action such as voting? What were
the strategies of these movements? What are the political conditions that allow social movements to
resonate with the American public? In addition to addressing these topics, this course surveys the
policy successes of major social and political movements. From the Civil Rights and Women's Right
Movement to the recent 2010 Tea Party movement, this course explores the various public policies
that have resulted from citizens' protest actions. While state-level and local-level government
responsiveness will be addressed, special attention will be given to how political protest influences
public policy in all three branches of the federal government.
SM 437. (AFRC638, PSCI437, PSCI638) Race & Criminal Justice. (M) Gottschalk.
This seminar analyzes the connection between race, crime, punishment, and politics in the United
States. The primary focus is on the role of race in explaining why the country's prision population
exploded since the early 1970s and why the United States today has the highest incarceration rate in
the world. Topics to be covered include: the early history of race in the development of the criminal
justice system, including an examination of lynchings and the convict-leasing system; the relationship
between the crime rate, patterns of offending and arrests, and the incarceration rate; public opinion
and "law-and-order" politics; U.S. penal policies compared with other industrialized countries; capital
punishment; the growth of the prision-industrial complex; the "war on drugs"; the courts, prisioners'
rights, and political prisoners; felon disenfranchisement, elections, and democracy; and the future of
penal reform. The class will take field trips to a maximum-security jail in Philadelphia and to a state
prision in the Philadelphia suburbs. This seminar is intended for both advanced undergraduates and
graduate students.

Page 20 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
SM 480. (URBS480) Liberation and Ownership. (A) Lamas.
Who is going to own what we all have a part of creating? The history of the Americas, and of all
peoples everywhere, is an evolving answer to the question of ownership. Ownership is about: the ties
that bind and those that separate; the creation of community and the imposition of hierarchies; the
dream of home ownership and ecological despoliation; dependency and the slave yearning to breathe
free. Of all the issues relevant to democracy, oppression, and economic injustice, ownership is
arguably the most important and least understood. Utilizing a variety of disciplinary perspectives, and
by focusing on particular global sites, students will assess and refine their views regarding ownership
in light of their own social, political, religious, and/or ethical commitments.
SM 485. (HIST485) Topics in African-American History. (C) Savage.
Topics vary.
See the Africana Studies Department's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a description of
the current offerings.

Graduate Courses
522. (EDUC522) Psychology of the African-American: Implications for Counseling and Human
Development. (B) Stevenson.
Using the Afro-centric philosophical understanding of the world, this course will focus on psychological
issues related to African Americans, including the history of African American psychology, its
application across the life span, and contemporary community issues.
SM 524. (PSCI535) INEQUALITY AND RACE POLICY. (M) Gillion.
SM 533. (AFRC230, LALS530, PSCI534, SOCI530) Advanced Selected Topics. (M) Charles, Zuberi,
Reed, Roberts.
This course is cross-listed when the subject matter is related to African, African American, or other
African Diaspora issues. Courses recently offered are, "Political Culture and American Cities, Social
Movements and Social Change, Critical Race Theory. See the Africana Studies Department's website
at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a description of the current offerings.
This course brings together the vantage points of urban political economy, history and urban
anthropology. Readings and discussions will cross those literatures, folding in considerations of race,
ethnicity and gender in the American city life, with a focus on the relation between culture and political
economy. We will reconstruct the history of the the different tracks of urban studies in the U.S.,
beginning with its roots in sociology and anthropology in the Chicago School and in political science in
reform-oriented studies of public administration. We will revisit the community power debate of the
1950s-1970s, which shook out significantly along disciplinary lines, and will examine the development
of the urban political economy perspective in the 1980s and 1990s, as well as developments within
U.S. urban anthropology since the 1960s. We will employ local case study materials, and at every point
we will try to understand the intellectual trajectories of the urbanist discoursesin relation to dynamics
contemporaneously shaping urban politics and policy.Course requirements are seminar preparation
which includes each student's leading discussion around specified reading assignments-- and a
research paper, the topic of which must be approved by week 5.

Page 21 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
SM 527. (GSWS527, HIST660, LALS527) Advanced Seminars in Africana Studies. (C) Sanders.
This course examines the lived and shared experiences and representations of Caribbean and Latin
American women. We will discuss the relationship between gender, labor, sexuality, religion, and race
in the Caribbean and the ways these concepts intersect with women's individual subjectivity and
national identity. By examining primary sources-such as speeches and letters-alongside historical
scholarship, literature, and popular media, we will study the impact of slave society and colonial pasts
on representations of women and construction of womanhood in the modern Caribbean and Latin
America and their diasporas through the 20th century. Beginning with late-18th century and ending
with contemporary migration narratives of each country, we will study the local and regional political
conditions that informed gender norms, social movements, and characterizations of Caribbean
sexuality globally. In our historical examination, we will question some of the iconic representations of
Caribbean and Latin American women-the racially mixed temptress, the pious matriarch, and the poor
uneducated laborer-to understand the meaning, purpose and usages Caribbean women's bodies as
objects of praise, possession, obsession and/or ridicule by communities, governments and religions
within and outside of the Caribbean.
In our interrogation of gender meanings, we will consider the ways Caribbean women and men
define themselves and each other, while considering the intersections of color, class, religion and
culture on the political and social realities of the Caribbean and the region. The geographic scope of
the course will extend to Haiti, the Dominican Republic, Jamaica, Cuba, Puerto Rico, Costa Rica and
Trinidad & Tobago. The following interrelated questions will anchor our exploration of each text: How
have representations of Caribbean and Latin American women informed historical constructions and
rhetoric of the region and national identity? What political and social strategies have Caribbean women
and men used to define themselves in their countries and throughout the region? How do the history
and contemporary conditions of a post-colonial nation impact the gender construction of Caribbean
identities? What is the relationship between modern Caribbean gender identities and the regional
racial and economic politics?
SM 528. (SOCI530, SWRK798) Advanced Topics. (C) Staff.
This course is cross-listed with SWRK 528 (Advanced Topics) when the subject matter is related to
African, African American, or other African Diaspora issues. Recent topics include, "Religion, Youth
and Popular Culture" and "Anxious Identities."
See the Africana Studies Department's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a description of
the current offerings.
SM 530. (HIST530) 20th Century Afro-American Historiography. (A) Staff.
This course will study major historical works on African American history for the post-1890 period.
Emphasis on intellectual, political, and cultural history, and special attention to current debates about
the relevance of this history and race generally to studies and students of United States history.
SM 545. (EDUC543) Historically Black Colleges and Universities: Current and Historical Issues.
(A) Gasman.
Students taking this course will learn about the historical context of HBCUs in educating African
Americans, and how their role has changed since the late 1800's. Students will also be expected to
connect financial, societal, and/or economic connections between the role of HBCUs past and present.
Specific contemporary challenges and success related to HBCUs that will be covered relate to control,
enrollment, accreditation, funding, degree completion, and outreach/retention programming. Students
will become familiar with HBCUs in their own right, as well as in comparison to other postsecondary
institutions.

Page 22 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
SM 547. (RELS501) Topics in Religion. (C) Butler.
Religions of the African Diaspora - Religion shapes and defines the lives of many persons in the
Africans Diaspora. This course will explore both the historical and present day manifestations of
religions practices by those in the African Diaspora, including Voodu, Candomble, Obeah, Rastafari,
African Initiated Churches, Pentecostalism, and Catholicism. Theoretical issues including sexuality,
gender, and material culture will also be covered in the course.
SM 591. (AFST560, FREN590) INTRO FRANCOPHON STUDIES. (M) An introduction to major
literary movements and authors from five areas of Francophonie: the Maghreb, West Africa, Central
Africa, the Caribbean and Quebec.
SPRING 2016: This seminar will introduce key authors and issues in Francophone studies through
texts that specifically focus on various experiences of war in colonial and postcolonial contexts.
Significantly, the first piece of fiction by an African author may well be Bakary Diallo's Force Bonte,
(1926), the autobiographical story of a WWI Senegalese Tirailleur, physically deformed by his war
experience and trying to through his writing. While Force Bont is unique as an early piece, similar
narratives have not ceased to proliferate in French and Francophone fiction. Indeed, writers from all
over the former French Empire have repeatedly offered fictional accounts of colonial subjects'
involvement in European wars, and especially WWII, with various degrees of ambivalence. As conflicts
and genocides continue, the experience of war fukes a new wave of Francophone accounts at the turn
of the twenty-first century. We will use an extensive diachronically and synchronically developed
reading (and viewing ) list of texts and films from Senegal, Congo, Rwanda, Guinea, Algeria,
Martinique, Mauritius, and (Metropolitan) France from the 1920s to 2014.
Using this material as the basis for our exploration we will address several questions: What are
some of the important tropes deployed in these narratives and how do they relate to broader issues
concerning colonial and postcolonial violence? How do the wars of others (e.g. WWI and WWII)
complicate the experience of war and questions of engagement and solidarity? How do such
experiences lay the groundwork for other wars, of liberation, for example? Finally how does war impact
the articulation of memory, survival and writing in colonial contexts, in the postcolony, and in the
European Metropole? Primary texts in French. Class discussion in French or English.
SM 570. (AFST570, COML573, ENGL570) Topics in Afro-American Literature. (M) Beavers, Tillet.
This course treats some important aspect of African American literature and culture. Topics vary.
Recent topics of the course have included: "Afro-American Women Writers," "Three Afro-American
Writers: Ellison, Gaines and McPherson," "Afro-American Autobiography," and "Afro-American
Literature: Black Music Among the Discourses." See the Africana Studies Department's website at
https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a description of the current offerings.
SM 587. (ANTH587) Race, Nation, Empire. (B) Thomas.
This graduate seminar examines the dynamic relationships among empires, nations and states;
colonial and post-colonial policies; and anti-colonial strategies within a changing global context. Using
the rubrics of anthropology, history, cultural studies, and social theory, we will explore the intimacies of
subject formation within imperial contexts- past and present- especially in relation to ideas about race
and belonging. We will focus on how belonging and participation have been defined in particular
locales, as well as how these notions have been socialized through a variety of institutional contexts.
Finally, we will consider the relationships between popular culture and state formation, examining
these as dialectical struggles for hegemony.

Page 23 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
SM 590. (COML590, ENGL590) Recent issues in Critical Theory.. (M) Jaji.
Topics vary. This course is a critical exploration of recent literary and cultural theory, usually focusing
on one particular movement or school, such as phenomenology, psychoanalysis, the Frankfurt School,
or deconstruction. See Africana Studies Department's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a
description of the current offering.
SM 593. (AFST593, FREN593) Studies in Francophone Literature. (M) Moudileno.
Topics will vary. Seminar will focus on one area, author, or "problematique" in Francophone studies.
Examples of an area-focused seminar: The African Contemporary Novel or Francophone Caribbean
Writers. Example of a single-author seminar: The Poetry and Drama of Aime Cesaire. Examples of a
thematic approach: writing and national identity, postcolonial conditions, autobiography.
SM 594. (ENGL595) POST-COLONIALISM LITERATURE. Jaji.
Writing in 2001, literary critic Jahan Ramazani introduced his study The Hybrid Muse by noting that
unlike authors of fiction, the achievements of postcolonial poets have been strangely neglected. In this
course we ll consider whether and why that may be changing, focusing on Africana poets from the
Caribbean and Africa. We will begin by considering Isidore Okpewho s influential study of oral poetry
and myth in Africa, and then move chronologically through a set of weekly readings likely to include
Nicolas Guillen (Cuba), Aime Cesaire (Martinique), Leopold Senghor (Senegal), Okpot Bitek
(Uganda), Chris Okigbo (Nigeria), Kofi Awoonor (Ghana), Kamau Braithwaite (Trinidad), Derek Walcott
(St. Lucia), David Dabydeen (Guyana/UK), Dionne Brand (Trinidad/Canada), Julia de Burgos (Puerto
Rico), M. NourbeSe Philip (Tobago/Canada) and Chris Abani (Nigeria/US). Among the broad
questions we ll consider are why women s voices appear to be underrepresented, how oral poetic
traditions and translation inflect this body of work, the grounds of comparison across African and
Caribbean spaces, and the particular contributions of poets who are also critics. The reading list may
be adjusted to address interests of seminar members, and prospective students are welcome to send
suggestions for particular authors, readings, or units to Tsitsi Jaji.
This is an introductory-level graduate class, open to advanced undergraduate majors by permission.
No particular background knowledge is expected. Assignments will consist of weekly response papers,
an in-class presentation, and a choice of a final conference-style paper (10-12pp) or syllabus.
SM 610. (HIST610) Topics in American History. (A) Savage.
This course is cross-listed with HIST 610 (Colloquium in American History) when the subject matter is
related to African, African American, or other African Diaspora issues.
See the Africana Studies Department's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edufor a description of
the current offerings.
SM 630. (AFRC431, DEMG630, SOCI430, SOCI630) Advanced Special Topics in Sociology. (C)
Zuberi. This course is cross-listed with SOCI 630 (Advanced Topics in Sociology) when the subject
matter is related to African American or other African Diaspora issues. A frequent topic of this course
is "Race, Colonialsim and Methods"
RACE, COLONIALISM AND METHODS. Critical perspectives in social sciences have been very
critical of the empirical assumptions of social science. This course will examine the scientific claims of
social science methodology by extending the critical perspective to biases that may underlie research
methods. Both qualitative and quantitative methods will be covered. This class will examine the impact
of ideas regarding the notion of the "other" on the development of research methods. We will discuss
good and bad practices within the context of the historical developments of the methods.

Page 24 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
SM 617. (SOCI617) Theories of Racial and Ethnic Differentiation. (M) Charles.
This course provides an overview of prominent theories of race and ethnicity, and is concerned with 1)
Understanding the nature and persistence of race and ethnicity as meaningful social groupings in
contemporary American society, and 2) Explaining the social significance of these group identities-that is, how these groupings are related to social stratification, to socio-cultural relations, and to the
political and economic dynamics in American society. Special attention will also be given to such topics
as immigration and the intersection of gender, race, and class.
SM 638. (AFRC437, PSCI437, PSCI638) Race and Criminal Justice. (M) Gottschalk.
This advanced seminar analyzes the connection between race, crime, punishment, and politics in the
United States. The primary focus is on the role of race in explaining why the country's prison
population increased six-fold since the early 1970s and why the United States today has the highest
incarceration rate in the world. Topics to be covered include: the early history of race in the
development of the criminal justice system, including an examination of lynchings and the convictleasing system; the relationship between the crime rate, patterns of offending and arrests, and the
incarceration rate; public opinion and law-and-order" politics; U.S. penal policies compared with other
industrialized countries; capital punishment; the growth of the prison-industrial complex; the "war on
drugs"; the courts, prisoners' rights, and political prisoners; felon disenfranchisement, elections, and
democracy; and the future of penal reform. This seminar is designed for advanced undergraduates, as
well as graduate students. The readings and assignments will be adjusted accordingly for graduate
students. The class will likely take field trips to a maximum-security jail in Philadelphia and to a state
prison in the Philadelphia suburbs.
SM 640. (ANTH640, COMM740, MUSC705, RELS617) Proseminar in Africana Studies. (B)
Beavers, Butler, Charles, Jackson, Savage, Thomas, Williams, Zuberi.
This course focuses on the historical and cultural relationship between Africans and their descendants
abroad.
SM 641. (HIST641) Topics in African American History. (B) Williams, Savage.
Topics vary. See the Africana Studies Department's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a
description of the current offerings.
SM 650. (AFST650, HIST650) Topics in African History. Babou, Cassanelli.
Reading and discussion course on selected topics in African history.

Page 25 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
SM 670. (ARTH501, GSWS670, HIST670) Topics in Trans Regional History. (C) Brown.
Reading and discussion course on selected topics in Transregional History See the Africana Studies
Department's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a description of the current offerings.
Comparative Slavery and Emancipation: What do historians gain by approaching the past with an
awareness of the body as a material and historically contingent entity? In this course we consider
several different ways of imagining historical bodies and the body in history. Our readings will explore
how events and new social, racial, economic and political formations influence how contemporaries
imagined and described bodies and their capacities. We will also explore whether the body itself might
be a dynamic source of historical change. Among the topics we will discuss are: medical theories
about bodies, epidemics and their impact; sensory capacities; capacities for physical labor; cultures of
violence; reproductive capacities and politics; coerced migration; fashion, beauty, and grace; and the
state's interest in mobilizing bodies to serve imperial, economic, and military agendas. This course
complements but does not duplicate "Race and Gender in Comparative Perspective" offered in Spring
2012. It is an intensive readings course with written assignments: short papers throughout the
semester and a synthetic final paper.
SM 705. (AFST705, ANTH705, FOLK715, MUSC705) Seminar in Ethnomusicology. (A) Muller,
Rommen.
This course is cross-listed with MUSC 705 (Seminar in Ethnomusicology) when the subject matter is
related to African, African American, or other African Diaspora issues. Recent courses offered include
"Reading Women in Jazz," "Popular Music and the Ethics of Style in the Caribben," "Music and
Tourism in the Caribbean," and "Imagining Africa Musically." See the Africana Studies Department's
course list at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a description ofthe current offering.
SM 706. Introduction to Africa and African Diaspora Thought. (C) Staff.
This course examines the processes by which African peoples have established epistemological,
cosmological, and religious systems both prior to and after the institution of Western slavery.
SM 708. (COML708, ENGL775, FREN700) Cultural and Literary Theory of Africa and the African
Diaspora. (C) Staff.
This course introduces students to the theoretical strategies underlying the construction of coherent
communities and systems of representation and how those strategies influence the uses of expressive
culture over time.
Topics vary. See the Africana Studies Depar tment's website at https://africana
Studies.sas.upenn.edu for a description of the current offerings.
SM 712. (EDUC712, URBS713) Comprehensive School Reform as Applied Public Policy. (C)
Hershberg.
This course examines how K-12 education policy is designed and implemented in the United States. It
uses a systems analysis as the framework for looking at who makes what kinds of demands on the
education policy system, how these demands are placed on the policy agenda, the decision making
process, and resulting education policies and policy outcomes. The course pays particular attention to
the roles of federal, state and local governments in education policy, and the impact of our
intergovernmental system on the design and implementation of policy. Students will also examine
major education policies and debate key education policy issues that arise at each level of
government.

Page 26 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
SM 710. (SOCI702) Political Economy and Social History of Africa and the African Diaspora. (E)
Hanchard, Zuberi.
This course provides the opportunity for students to investigate the relationship between the
emergence of African peoples as historical subjects and their location within specific geopolitical and
economic circumstances.
SPRING 2016: This course provides an overview of Afro-descended populations in the Americas
and their struggles for rights, recognition, territory and justice within the nation-states of the region. Its
historical arc begins with the era of nationalist independence movements in the 1820's, abolitionist
movements though the late 19th century, and culminating in the social movements for affirmative
action, land-rights and cultural recognition in the late 20th and early 21st centuries. Afro-descendant
populations, (along with indigenous populations), have experienced the full range of political
subjectivity in American (North and South) politics; slaves/non-persons, colonial and stateless
subjects, partial citizenship, and full citizenship. Readings range from the historiography of Afro-Latin
America, conceptual and methodological writings from political science, anthropology and sociology,
and monographs on Afro-descendent populations, so that students can explore the implications of
Afro-Latin American politics for an understanding of modern politics more generally. Students will
become familiar with key themes and debates in scholarship on Afro-Latin American politics, along
with the range of methodological approaches and critical perspectives which inform its study across
the social sciences.
SM 770. (COML773, ENGL770) Afro-American American Literature. (M) Staff.
An advanced seminar in African-American literature and culture.
SM 771. (FOLK770, MUSC770) Seminar in Afro-American Music. (M) Ramsey.
This seminar treats selected aspects of the history, aesthetics, criticism and historiography of AfricanAmerican music.
Topics vary. See the Africana Studies Department's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a
description of the current offerings.
SM 777. (SOCI777) Special Topics. (M) Zuberi, Bonilla-Silva.
This course is cross-listed with SOCI 777 (Special Topics) when the subject matter is related to African
American or other African Diaspora issues.
Topics vary: See the Africana Studies Department's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a
description of current offerings.
SM 798. (SWRK798) Advanced Topics. (M) Freeman, Dixon-Roman.
This course is cross-listed with SWRK 798 (Advanced Topics) when the subject matter is related to
African, African American, or other African Diaspora issues. Recent topics are "Difference" and Social
Policy," and "Critical Race Theory."
See the Africana Studies Department's website at https://africana.sas.upenn.edu for a description of
the current offerings.

African Language Courses

Page 27 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
170. (AFST170, AFST517) Elementary Yoruba I. (A) Awoyale. Offered through the Penn Language
Center
This Elementary Yoruba I course can be taken to fulfull a language requirement, or for linguistic
preparation to do research on Nigeria and the diaspora/Africa-related topics. The course emphasizes
communicative competence to enable the students to acquire linguistic and extra-linguistic skills in
Yoruba. The content of the course is selected from various everyday life situations to enable the
students to communicate in predictable commom daily settings. Culture, as it relates to language use,
is also part of the course content.
Students will acquire the speaking, listening, reading, and writing skills at the mid-high novice level,
based on the ACTFL scale. The mid-high novice level proficiency skills that the students will acquire
constitute threshold capabilities of the second semester range of proficiency to prepare students for
Elementary Yoruba II course materials.
171. (AFRC517, AFST171, AFST518) Elementary Yoruba II. (B) Awoyale.Prerequisite(s): Completion
of Elementary Yoruba I, or permission of instructor. Offered through the Penn Language Center
The main objective of this course is to further sharpen the Yoruba linguistic knowledge that the student
acquired in level I. By the end of the course, the student should be able to (1) read, write, and
understand simple to moderately complex sentences in Yoruba; and, (2) advance in the knowledge of
the Yoruba culure.
180. (AFST180, AFST580) Elementary Swahili I. (A) Mshomba. Offered through the Penn Language
Center
The elementary Swahili course can be taken to fulfill a language requirement, or for linguistic
preparation to do research on East Africa/Africa-related topics. The course emphasizes
communicative compentence to enable the students to aquire linguistic and extra-linguistic skills in
Swahili. The content of the course is selected from various everyday life situations to enable the
students to communicate in predictable commom daily settings. Culture, as it relates to language use,
is also part of the course content.
Students will acquire the speaking, listening, reading, and writing skills at the mid-high novice level,
based on the ACTFL scale. The mid-high level proficiency skills that the students acquire constitute
threshold capabilities of the second semester range of proficiency to prepare students for Elementary
Swahili II course materials.
240. (AFRC540, AFST240, AFST540, NELC481) Elementary Amharic I. (A) Hailu. Offered through
the Penn Language Center
The Elementary Amharic I course can be taken to fulfill a language requirement, or for linguistic
preparation to do research on Ethiopia/Africa-related topics. The course emphasizes communicative
competence to enable the students to acquire linguistic and extra-linguistic skills in Amharic. The
content of the course is selected from various everyday life situations to enable the students to
communicate in predictable commom daily settings. Culture, as it relates to language use, is also part
of the course content.
Students will acquire the speaking, listening, reading, and writting skills at the mid-high novice level,
based on the ACTFL scale. The mid-high novice level proficiency skills that the students will acquire
constitute threshold capabilities of the second semester range of proficiency to prepare students for
Elementary Amharic II course materials.
181. (AFST181, AFST581) Elementary Swahili II. (B) Bolger.Prerequisite(s): Completion of
Elementry Swahili I, or permission of instructor. Offered through the Penn Language Center
This course continues to introduce basic grammar, vocabulary, and the reading and writing of Swahili
to new speakers. During this term, folktales, other texts, and film selections are used to help introduce
important aspects of Swahili culture and the use of the language in wide areas of Africa.

Page 28 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
185. (AFST185, AFST585) Elementary Swahili: Accelerated. (C) Staff. Offered through the Penn
Language Center
241. (AFRC541, AFST241, AFST541, NELC482) Elementary Amharic II. (B) Hailu.Prerequisite(s):
Completion of Elementary Amharic I, or permission of the instructor. Offered through the Penn
Language Center
Continuation of Elementary Amharic I.
242. (AFRC543, AFST242, AFST543, NELC483) Intermediate Amharic I. (A) Hailu. Offered through
the Penn Language Center
243. (AFRC544, AFST243, AFST544, NELC484) Intermediate Amharic II. (B) Hailu. Offered through
the Penn Language Center
247. (AFRC548, AFST247, AFST547) Advanced Amharic. (C) Zemichael. Offered through the Penn
Language Center
An advanced Amharic course that will further sharpen the student's knowledge of the Amharic
language and the culture of the Amharas. The learner's communicative skills will be further developed
through listening, speaking, reading, and writing. There will also be discussions on cultural and
political issues.
270. (AFST270, AFST529) Intermediate Yoruba I. (A) Awoyale. Offered through the Penn Language
Center
271. (AFRC534, AFST271, AFST532) Intermediate Yoruba II. (B) Awoyale. Offered throught the Penn
Language Center
280. (AFST280, AFST582) Intermediate Swahili I. (A) Mshomba. Offered through the Penn
Language Center
282. (AFST281, AFST583) Intermediate Swahili II. (B) Mshomba.Prerequisite(s): Intermediate
Swahili 1, or permission of Instructor. Offered through the Penn Language Center
284. (AFST284, AFST584) Advanced Swahili I. (C) Mshomba.Prerequisite(s): AFST 280, LING 280,
AFRC280 or permission of Instructor. Offered through the Penn Language Center
This is an advanced Kiswahili course which will engage learners in extended spoken and written
discourse. Advanced learners of Kiswahili will listen to, read about, write, and speak on authentic video
materials, contemporary novels, and newspapers. They will also participate in various discussions on
cultural and political issues.
285. (AFST285, AFST586) Advanced Swahili II. (B) Mshomba. Offered through the Penn Language
Center
491. (AFST491) African Language Tutorial - Elementary II. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Permission of
Penn Language Center. Offered through Penn Language Center
493. (AFST493) African Language Tutorial - Intermediate II. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Permission of
Penn Language Center.
Continuation of AFST 492

Page 29 of 30

AFRICANA STUDIES
(AS) {AFRC}
495. (AFST495) African Language Tutor: Adv II. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Permission of Penn
Language Center.
Continuation of AFST 494.
497. (AFST497) Language & Culture II. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Permission of Penn Language
Center.
Continuation of AFST 496
517. (AFRC171, AFST171, AFST518) Elementary Yoruba II. (B) Awoyle. Offered through Penn
Language Center
The main objective of this course is to further sharpen the Yoruba linquistic knowledge that the student
acquired in level I. By the end of the course, the student should be able to (1) read, write, and
understand simple to moderately complex sentences in Yoruba; and (2) advance in the knowledge of
the Yoruba culture.
534. (AFRC271, AFST271, AFST532) Intermediate Yoruba II. (B) Awoyale. Offered through Penn
Language Center
540. (AFRC240, AFST240, AFST540, NELC481) Elementary Amharic I. (A) Hailu. Offered through
the Penn Language Center
An introductory course for students with no previous knowledge of Amharic. Amharic belongs to the
southern branch of Hemeto-Semitic languages which is also referred to as "Afrasian." Amharic is the
official language of Ethiopia and is spoken by 14 million native Amharas and by approximately 19
million of the other ethnic groups in Ethiopia. The goals of this course are to introduce students to the
culture, customs, and traditions of the Amharas. Students will develop communicative skills through
listening, speaking, reading, and writing.
541. (AFRC241, AFST241, AFST541, NELC482) Elementary Amharic II. (B) Hailu. Offered through
the Penn Language Center
Continuation of Elementary Amharic I.
543. (AFRC242, AFST242, AFST543, NELC483) Intermediate Amharic I. (A) Hailu.
Offered through the Penn Language Center
544. (AFRC243, AFST243, AFST544, NELC484) Intermediate Amharic II. (B) Hailu.
Offered through the Penn Language Center

Page 30 of 30

