AFRICAN STUDIES
(AS) {AFST}

Undergraduate Courses
SM 016. (MUSC016) Freshman Seminar. (M) Muller.
SM 018. (AFRC018, ANTH018) Popular Culture in Africa. (C) Barnes. Freshman Seminar
This course concentrates on popular culture in sub-Saharan Africa. It examines the way people reflect
on and represent various aspects and issues in their daily lives, in public media, and through a diverse
range of performative and creative outlets. It explores the way cultural traditions are created,
promulgated, and perpetuated. It looks at the way popular culture deals with pleasure and pain;
identitity, difference, and diversity; wealth and power; modernity and history; gender relations;
suppression, resistance, and violence; and local versus global processes. In short, popular culture will
serve as a window through which to observe contemporary life.
050. (AFRC050, ANTH022, FOLK022, MUSC050) World Musics and Cultures. (C) Arts & Letters
Sector. All Classes. Muller.
Draws on repertories of various societies from Asia, Africa, Europe, and the Americas to examine
relations between aesthetic productions and social processes. We investigate musical sounds, cultural
logics informing those sounds, and social strategies of performance. Topics may include indigenous
music theories, music and social organization, symbolic expressions and musical meaning, gender,
religion, and social change.
062. (NELC062) Land of the Pharaohs. (M) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Silverman,
Wegner.
This course provides an introduction to the society, culture and history of ancient Egypt. The objective
of the course is to provide an understanding of how ancient Egypt emerged as one of the most
successful and long-lived civilizations in world history.
071. (AFRC071, ENGL071) Literatures of Africa and the African Diaspora. (M) Staff.
This course will serve as an introduction to a particularly rich arena of literature in English. It will also
help students to begin to understand many of the racial subtexts underlying the culture wars in
America, where too often in the full glare of cameras, an anguished voice informs the audience that
"as an African, I cannot expect justice in this America." One of the things at work here is the
assumption of a common Africa diasporic identity -- understood as an excluded, marginalized subtext
of identity in the new world. But why is Africa being involed here? What does "Africa" mean in this new
world context? What is the larger global context of these assumptions about "Africa" and what is its
history? Does the term "Africa" itself have a history? What is "African literature?" This course,
therefore, will also help students not only to ask fundamental questions about identity but also to
understand identity as a moving and dynamic construct. How, for example, does "Africa" travel to
South America, to the Caribbean Archipelago, and to Europe?
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a description of the current
offerings.
075. (AFRC075, HIST075) Africa Before 1800. (B) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Babou,
Cassanelli.
Survey of major themes and issues in African history before 1800. Topics include: early civilizations,
African kingdoms and empires, population movements, the spread of Islam, the slave trade era. Also,
emphasis on how historians use archaeology, linguistics, and oral traditions to reconstruct Africa's
early history.

Page 1 of 14

AFRICAN STUDIES
(AS) {AFST}
076. (AFRC076, HIST076) Africa Since 1800. (A) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Cassanelli.
Survey of major themes, events, and personalities in African history from the early nineteenth century
through the 1960s. Topics include abolition of the slave trade, European imperialism, impact of colonial
rule, African resistance, religious and cultural movements, rise of naturalism and pan-Africanism,
issues of ethnicity and "tribalism" in modern Africa.
102. (CINE112, COML245, ENGL102) Study of a Theme. (C) Arts & Letters Sector. All Classes.
This is an introduction to literary study through the works of a compelling literary theme. (For offerings
in a given semester, please see the online course descriptions on the English Department website).
The theme's function within specific historical contexts, within literary history generally, and within
contemporary culture, are likely to be emphasized. Some versions of this course will also serve as an
introduction to other members of the English faculty, who will visit the class as guest lecturers. This
course is designed for the General Requirement, and is ideal for the students wishing to take an
English course but not necessarily intending to major.
140. (AFRC140) Elementary Zulu I in Residence. (C) Mbeje. OBJECTIVE: Attainment of Level 1
(ceiling) in speaking, listening, reading, and writing skills on the Interagency Language Roundtable
(ILR) scale.
This elementary course is for beginners and it requires no prior knowledge of Zulu. The course will
expose students to the Zulu language and culture and will be based in the National Standards for
Foreign Language Learning. Students will be engaged in communicative language learning through
interpersonal, interpretive and presentational modes of language learning techniques. They will gain
knowledge and understanding of the Zulu culture. They will use their Zulu language and culture
learning experience to connect with other disciplines and further their knowledge of these disciplines
through perspectives acquired from their Zulu class. They will also develop insight into the nature of
language and culture through comparisons of the Zulu language and culture and their own. Through
movies, songs, and other cultural activities online students will acquire the natural use of the language
which will enable them to acquire linguistic and cultural skill to become life-long learners who can
participate in Zulu communities in the U.S. and overseas.
147. (HIST147, NELC187) Holy Wars & Jihads. (C)
169. The Conflicts in Darfur and South Sudan. Dinar.
Sudan is marred by several military conflicts between the state and its citizens not only during colonial
times but even after its independence in 1956. The current conflict in Darfu is only one of many wars
that ravaged Sudan prior to the ending of Africa's longest civil war (1956-1971, 1983-2005) in the
southern part of the country. This course will provide an indepth analysis of the two main conflicts in
the Sudan which ends up with the division of the country into two. (1) The first conflict we will study is
the Darfur conflict based upon historical and cultural factors, as well as analyzing the ideology of the
successive Sudanese states specifically the current government. The course will explore the role of
regional and international politics with interest in the ongoing conflict, the "Genocide" and ICC
controversies, as well as the local militia, the politics of aid in war-torn areas, and the role of Sudan's
neighbors in the Darfur conflict and how this could be related to other conflicts in Sudan. (2) The
second conflict that we'll cover is the conflict in southern Sudan, which ends up by its secession as an
independent country in 2011. This course aims towards the study of the reasons behind these military
conflicts and ethnic conflicts that charaterize the modern history of Sudan.

Page 2 of 14

AFRICAN STUDIES
(AS) {AFST}
190. (AFRC190, ANTH190, HIST190) Introduction to Africa. (A) Society Sector. All classes. Hasty.
During the semester we will focus on people and communities of sub-Saharan Africa and on the ways
people represent, reflect on, and react to various aspects and issues in their lives and the institutions
which dominate their communities. We will focus particularly on the history, contemporary expression,
and inter-relationships among politics, religion, and aesthetic practice. Members of Penn's African
Studies community will share their expertise with the class and introduce the University's Africa
resources. Texts consist of weekly readings, films, and recordings; and class members will be
expected to attend several lectures outside of class.
210. (AFRC210, HIST250, RELS210) African Religions. (M) Ofosu-Donkoh.
Religion permeates all aspects of African life and thought. There is no dichotomy between religion and
society in Africa. In this course, we will survey some of the indigenous religions of Africa and examine
their nature and their philosophical foundations. We will examine African systems of beliefs, myths,
symbols, and rituals, as developed by African societies to express their distinctive worldviews. We will
also raise some questions about the interrelationship of religion and culture as well as religion and
social change in Africa, and the challenges of modern technologies to African beliefs. We will examine
the future of African religions and analyze the extent to which African peoples can hold on to their
beliefs in this age of rapid technological and scientific development. Emphasis will be on themes rather
than on individual national or tribal religions. Case studies, however, will be limited to West Africa
among the Akan of Ghana, the Yoruba of Nigeria, and the Mende of Sierra Leone. Questions are
provided (a) to guide and direct reading (b) to form the basis for discussions (c) as exercises and (d)
for examinations.
221. (AFRC222, GSWS222) African Women's Lives: Past and Present. (M) Blakely.
Restoring women to African history is a worthy goal, but easier said than done.The course examines
scholarship over the past forty years that brings to light previously overlooked contributions African
women have made to political struggle, religious change, culture preservation, and economic
development from pre-colonial times to present. The course addresses basic questions about
changing women's roles and human rights controversies associated with African women within the
wider cultural and historical contexts in which their lives are lived. It also raises fundamental questions
about sources, methodology, and representation, including the value of African women's oral and
written narrative and cinema production as avenues to insider perspectives on African women's lives.
225. (AFRC225) African Languages and Culture. (C) Mbeje.
The aim of the course is to provide a general perspective on African languages and African linguistics.
No background in linguistics is necessary. Students will be introduced to theoretical linguistics-its
concepts, theories, ways of argumentation, data collection, data analysis, and data interpretation. The
focus will be on the languages and linguistics of Africa to provide you with the knowledge and skills
required to handle the language and language-related issues typical of African conditions. We will
cover topics related to formal linguistics (phonology/phonetics, morphology, syntax, and semantics),
aspects of pragmatics as well as the general socio-linguistic character of African countries. We will
also cover language in context, language and culture, borrowing, multilingualism, and cross-cultural
communication in Africa.

Page 3 of 14

AFRICAN STUDIES
(AS) {AFST}
SM 227. (AFST503, ANTH227, ANTH504) Media in Africa. (B)
This course examines the recent explosion of media culture in Africa, including radio, TV, film, internet,
newspapers, and magazines. We look at the media forms themselves, studying the elements of
African culture that shape the language,themes, and imagery of African media. We also study the
producers of the media: the African journalists, film directors, disc jockeys, actors, and entertainers
who construct the African public sphere through talent and ingenuity, drawing on cultural knowledge
and social relationships. Finally, we'll turn to African audiences, learning how Africans actively engage
with media forms, using media to participate in national conversations on such topics as gender,
environmentalism, corruption, and development. Throughout the course, we study how African media
give expression to ethnic, political, and religious identities, playing a crucial role in the construction
and interaction of communities within the larger context of nation-states.
SM 232. (CINE233, HIST232) Topics in World History. (C) Staff.
228. (COML224) African Epic: Performance & Power. Blakely.
Homer's Iliad and Odyssey from ancient Greece and Song of Roland from medieval France are
familiar landmarks in world literature. In contrast, Sunjata Epic of Mali, Mwindo Epic of Congo and
more than twenty-five other heroic narrative poems throughout Africa are less known but equally
valuable for accessing ancient wisdom, exploits of heroes and heroines, cultural values, knowledge
systems, and supernatural realms. An additional benefit of studying African epic is that they are
performed today or in living memory, so the cultural, performative, and social contexts are not
obscured by centuries. These living traditions give us opportunities to more fully understand bards'
roles, interaction of bard and audience, transformation from oral to written representation, and the
extension of epic themes into other aspects of social life.
SM 231. (AFRC231, CINE210, FREN231) Francophone African Cinema. (M) Moudileno.
This course will introduce students to recent films by major directors from Francophone Africa. While
attention will be given to aesthetic aspects and individual creativity, the viewing and discussions will be
mostly organized arounda variety of (overlapping) themes: History; Tradition/modernity; Urban Life;
Gender and sexuality; Politics. Class conducted in French.
SM 233. (FOLK233) African Folklore, Popular Culture, and the Diaspora. (M) Blakely.
This course explores African expressive culture in both West and Central Africa and the Americas,
considering continuities in visual and verbal art, religion, and ritual, and material culture from Africa to
the New World. The topic is interdisciplinary, drawing on research by folklorists, cultural
anthropologists, archaeologists, and art historians. This study informs our understanding of both
particular historical connections related to specific peoples and genres and fundamental aesthetic
values that have shaped and continue to influence the entire Afro-Atlantic region.
235. Africans Abroad: Emigrants, Refugees, and Citizens in the New African Diaspora. (M)
Cassanelli.
This seminar will examine the experiences of recent emigrants and refugees from Africa, including
many now living in the city of Philadelphia and the surrounding region. In addition to reading some of
the historical and comparative literature on migration, ethnic diasporas, and transnationalism, students
will have the opportunity to conduct research on specific African communities in Philadelphia or
elsewhere in North America, Europe, or the Middle East. African emigres' relations with both their
home and host societies will be explored and compared with the experience of other immigrant groups
over the past century. Topics include reasons for leaving Africa, patterns of economic and educational
adaptation abroad, changes in gender and generational roles, issues of cultural and political identity,
and the impact of national immigration policies.

Page 4 of 14

AFRICAN STUDIES
(AS) {AFST}
253. (AFRC253, ANTH263, FOLK253, GSWS253, MUSC256) Music and Performance of Africa.
(M) Muller.Prerequisite(s): Completion of MUSC 050 is recommended.
This class provides an overview of the most popular musical styles and discussion of the cultural and
political contexts in which they emerged in contemporary Africa. Learning to perform a limited range of
African music/dance will be part of this course. No prior performance experience required. (Formerly
Music 253).
257. (AFRC257, PSCI210) Contemporary African Politics. (C) Staff.
A survey of politics in Africa focusing on the complex relationships between state, society, the
economy, and external actors. It will cover colonial rule, the independence struggle, authoritarian and
democratic statecraft, international debt, economic development, military rule, ethnicity, and class.
268. (AFRC268, SOCI268) CONTEMPORARY ISSUES IN AFRICAN SOCIETY. Imoagene.
This course will deal with law and society in Africa. After surveying the various legal systems in Africa,
the focus will be on how and to what extent the countries of Africa "re-Africanized" their legal systems
by reconciling their indigenous law with western law and other legal traditions to create unified legal
systems that are used as instruments of social change and development. Toward this end, the
experiences of various African countries covering the various legal traditions will be included. Specific
focus will be on laws covering both economic and social relations. This emphasis includes laws of
contracts and civil wrongs, land law, law of succession, marriage and divorce and Africa's laws of
International Relations, among other laws. Throughout this course a comparative analysis with nonAfrican countries will be stressed.
SM 272. (AFRC276, COML273, ENGL271) Topics: Africa and African Diaspora. (M) Jaji.
This course explores an aspect of the literature of Africa and the African Diaspora intensively; specific
course topics will vary from year to year.
SM 354. (ARTH354) African Art & Culture. (A) Blakely.
African art is a rich and varied field of study encompassing visual arts and architecture of ancient
cultures, regional artistic traditions of diverse peoples in more recent precolonial and colonial times,
and contemporary artists, both self-taught and formally trained. The principal goals of this course are
to help students to appreciate the scope of this field while also gaining in-depth understanding of
particular African artistic traditions, artists, and artworks within specific historical and cultural contexts.
Topics to be considered include persistent misconceptions about African art; indigenous African
aesthetics; semiotics of African visual signs and sign systems; roles of "traditional artists" in African
societies; gender issues in art production, representation, and performance; historical contacts and
cultural interaction; spiritual, therapeutic, and political uses of art; and interrelations of visual art with
verbal and kinesthetic expression.

Page 5 of 14

AFRICAN STUDIES
(AS) {AFST}
SM 489. (AFRC488, AFST589, HIST489, URBS489) Africans Abroad: Emigrants, Refugees, and
Citizens in the New African Diaspora. (M) Cassanelli.
This seminar will examine the experiences of recent emigrants and refugees from Africa, including
many now living in the city of Philadelphia and the surrounding region. In addition to reading some of
the historical and comparative literature on migration, ethnic diasporas, and transnationalism, students
will have the opportunity to conduct research on specific African communities in Philadelphia or
elsewhere in North America, Europe, or the Middle East. African emigres' relations with both their
home and host societies will be explored and compared with the experience of other immigrant groups
over the past century. Topics include reasons for leaving Africa, patterns of economic and educational
adaptation abroad, changes in gender and generational roles, issues of cultural and political identity,
and the impact of national immigration policies.

Graduate Courses
SM 390. (AFRC391, FREN390) Survey Francophone Lit. (M) Moudileno.
This class will explore the African city as a site of colonial and postcolonial exchanges by way of
twentieth-century European and African representations. We will examine, on the one hand, the status
of the urban located in Africa in European works from the colonial period (fiction and non-ficiton
including Gide, Leiris, Londres). On the other hand, we will study Africans, focusing on the dreams
and transformations involved in the passage from the village to the city to the metropole. Essays from
history, sociology, urban studies and postcolonial theory will supplement the study of the primary texts.
All readings, class discussions and written assignments in French.
467. (NELC467) Introduction to Egyptian Culture and Archaeology. (B) Wegner.
Covers principal aspects of ancient Egyptian culture (environment, urbanism, religion, technology,
etc.) with special focus on archaeological data; includes study of University Museum artifacts. Follows
AMES 266/466 - History of Egypt taught in the Fall semester.
SM 515. (PSCI516) African Poltical Economy. (M) Staff.

Page 6 of 14

AFRICAN STUDIES
(AS) {AFST}
SM 560. (AFRC591, COML590, FREN590) Introduction to Francophone Studies. (M) Moudileno.
An introduction to major literary movements and authors from five areas of Francophonie: the
Maghreb, West Africa, Central Africa, the Caribbean and Quebec.
SPRING 2016: This seminar will introduce key authors and issues in Francophone studies through
texts that specifically focus on various experiences of war in colonial and postcolonial contexts.
Significantly, the first piece of fiction by an African author may well be Bakary Diallo's Force Bonte,
(1926), the autobiographical story of a WWI Senegalese Tirailleur, physically deformed by his war
experience and trying to through his writing. While Force Bont is unique as an early piece, similar
narratives have not ceased to proliferate in French and Francophone fiction. Indeed, writers from all
over the former French Empire have repeatedly offered fictional accounts of colonial subjects'
involvement in European wars, and especially WWII, with various degrees of ambivalence. As conflicts
and genocides continue, the experience of war fukes a new wave of Francophone accounts at the turn
of the twenty-first century. We will use an extensive diachronically and synchronically developed
reading (and viewing ) list of texts and films from Senegal, Congo, Rwanda, Guinea, Algeria,
Martinique, Mauritius, and (Metropolitan) France from the 1920s to 2014.
Using this material as the basis for our exploration we will address several questions: What are
some of the important tropes deployed in these narratives and how do they relate to broader issues
concerning colonial and postcolonial violence? How do the wars of others (e.g. WWI and WWII)
complicate the experience of war and questions of engagement and solidarity? How do such
experiences lay the groundwork for other wars, of liberation, for example? Finally how does war impact
the articulation of memory, survival and writing in colonial contexts, in the postcolony, and in the
European Metropole? Primary texts in French. Class discussion in French or English.
SM 589. (AFRC488, AFST489, HIST489, URBS489) AFRICANS ABROAD. (M)
SM 593. (ENGL595) Studies-Francophone Literature. (M) Moudileno.
Topics will vary. Seminar will focus on one area, author, or "problematique" in Francophone studies.
Examples of area-focused seminar: The African Contemporary novel or Francophone Caribbean
writers. Example of single-author seminar: "The Poetry and Drama of Aime Cesaire. Examples of
thematic approach: writing and national identity; postcolonial conditions, autobiography.
SM 628. (HIST628) Africa in the Wider World: Connections, Contexts, Comparisons. (A)
Cassanelli.
This seminar is aimed at students of history, culture, literature, and the arts in the Americas, Europe,
or Asia, who need to know something about African history and culture for their own research or
studies. It is intended to help students identify, analyze, and incorporate selected scholarship on Africa
into their particular area or disciplinary specializations. Topics covered include slavery and slave
societies; diasporas and migrations, linguistic, religious and cultural transfers and survivals; and issues
of identity, assimilation, nationalism, and pan-Africanism. we want to ask: how much African history,
culture, language, and social structure do Americanists or other non-specialists need to know to do
sound scholarship? What comparative questions should we be asking about Africa, and how can we
find and utilize data that is reliable and relevant to our our own work.
SM 696. (COML696, FREN696) POSTCO THEORY FRANCOPHON.

Page 7 of 14

AFRICAN STUDIES
(AS) {AFST}
SM 630. (HIST630, HSSC630) African History: Core Issues of Social Process. (C) Feierman.
This graduate seminar explores the literature of African history while trying to find ways to understand
history which happens on unfamiliar social and cultural terrain. The terrain is unfamiliar because the
words professional historians use, and the underlying assumptions about social process, show the
marks of many generations of writing about Europe. The standard histories, then, are torn between
describing events in terms of European social process, in which case they do violence to the history,
or finding a historical language which is closer to being locally grounded but unfamiliar to a western
audience. In this course we study a number of core issues of social process. Each one is meant to
direct attention to a complex of local social forms, and each is at the heart of a major body of writings
of African history. A tentative list of topics includes the following: Oral tradition; knowledge and identity;
ecology and ethnicity; forms of local authority and state power; ritual, conquest, and the transformation
of political authority; political economy; gender and personal dependency; the ecological history of
disease; popular associations and the state; the local bases of nationalism.
SM 650. (AFRC650, HIST650) Topics in African History. (C) Staff.
Reading and discussion course on selected topics in African history
SM 693. (FREN693) Africa Looks to Europe. (M) Moudileno.
Topics will vary. Seminar will focus on one area, author, or "problematique" in Francophone studies.
Examples of area-focused seminar: The African contemporary novel or Francophone Caribbean
writers. Example of single-author seminar: The Poetry and Drama of Aime Cesaire. Examples of
thematic approach: writing and national identity; postcolonial conditions; autobiography.
SM 701. (AFRC701, ANTH701, ENVS701, HIST701) Graduate Seminar in African Studies. (B)
Staff.
Topics vary. Please consult The African Studies Center for details.
SM 705. (AFRC705, ANTH705, FOLK715, GSWS705, MUSC705) Seminar in Ethnomusicology. (A)
Muller.
Topics in Ethnomusicogology. Spring 2010: Imagining Africa Musically: This seminar considers ways in
which scholars write about and imagine the African continent through the lens of musical performance.
We will consider a range of writings about Africa as a continent, regionally, and nationally, including
north Africa and the Maghreb through series of themes including: diaspora, cosmopolitanism, gender,
spirituality, and as world music. This is a reading and listening intensive seminar.
SM 740. (HIST740) Research Seminar in Middle Eastern History. (C) Staff.
Research seminar on selected topics in Middle Eastern history.
SM 775. (ENGL775) South African Literature. (M) Barnard.
An advanced seminar in anglophone African literature, possibly including a few works in translation.

African Language Courses

Page 8 of 14

AFRICAN STUDIES
(AS) {AFST}
170. (AFRC170, AFST517) Elementary Yoruba I. (A) Awoyale. Offered through Penn Language
Center
The Elementary Yoruba I course can be taken to fulfill a language requirement, or for linguistic
preparation to do research on Nigeria and the diaspora/Africa-related topics. The course emphasizes
communicative competence to enable the students to acquire linguistic and extra-linguistic skills in
Yoruba. The content of the course is selected from various everyday life situations to enable the
students to communicate in predictable common daily settings. Culture, as it relates to language use,
is also part of the course content.
Students will acquire the speaking, listening, reading, and writing skills at the mid-high novice level,
based on the ACTFL scale. The mid-high novice level proficiency skills that the students will acquire
constitute threshold capabilibilities of the second semester range of proficiency to prepare students for
Elementary Yoruba II course materials.
171. (AFRC171, AFRC517, AFST518) Elementary Yoruba II. (B) Awoyale.Prerequisite(s):
Completion of Elementary Yoruba I, or permission of instructor. Offered through Penn Language
Center
The main objective of this course is to further sharpen the Yoruba linquistic knowledge that the student
acquired in level I. By the end of the course, the student should be able to (1) read, write, and
understand simple to moderately complex sentences in Yoruba; and, (2) advance in the knowledge of
the Yoruba culture.
180. (AFRC180, AFST580) Elementary Swahili I. (A) Mshomba. Offered through Penn Language
Center
The Elementary Swahili I course can be taken to fulfill a language requirement, or for linguistic
preparation to do research on East Africa/Africa-related topics. The course emphasizes
communicative compentence to enable the students to acquire linguistic and extra-linguistic skills in
Swahili. The content of the course is selected from various everyday life situations to enable the
students to communicate in predictable common daily settings. Culture, as it relates to language use,
is also part of the course content.
Students will acquire the speaking, listening, reading, and writing skills at the mid-high novice level,
based on the ACTFL scale. The mid-high level proficiency skills that the students will acquire
constitute threshold capabilities of the second semester range of proficiency to prepare students for
Elementary Swahili II course materials.
181. (AFRC181, AFST581) Elementary Swahili II. (B) Mshomba.Prerequisite(s): Completion of
Elementary Swahili I, or permission of instructor. Offered through Penn Language Center
This course continues to introduce basic grammar, vocabulary, and the reading and writing of Swahili
to new speakers. During this term, folktales, other texts, and film selections are used to help introduce
important aspects of Swahili culture and the use of the language in wide areas of Africa.
242. (AFRC242, AFRC543, AFST543, NELC483) Intermediate Amharic I. (A) Hailu. Offered through
Penn Language Center

Page 9 of 14

AFRICAN STUDIES
(AS) {AFST}
240. (AFRC240, AFRC540, AFST540, NELC481) Elementary Amharic I. (A) STAFF. Offered through
Penn Language Center
The Elementary Amharic I course can be taken to fulfill a language requirement, or for linguistic
preparation to do research on Ethiopia/Africa-related topics. The course emphasizes communicative
competence to enable the students to acquire linguistic and extra-linguistic skills in Amharic. The
content of the course is selected from various everyday life situations to enable the students to
communicate in predictable common daily settings. Culture, as it relates to language use, is also part
of the course content.
Students will acquire the speaking, listening, reading, and writing skills at the mid-high novice level,
based on the ACTFL scale. The mid-high novice level proficiency skills that the students will acquire
constitute threshold capabilities of the second semester range of proficiency to prepare students for
Elementary Amharic II course materials.
241. (AFRC241, AFRC541, AFST541, NELC482) Elementary Amharic II. (B) Hailu.Prerequisite(s):
Completion of Elementary Amharic I, or permission of the instructor. Offered through Penn Language
Center
Continuation of Elementary Amharic I.
243. (AFRC243, AFRC544, AFST544, NELC484) Intermediate Amharic II. (B) Hailu. Offered through
Penn Language Center
247. (AFRC247, AFRC548, AFST547, NELC583) Advanced Amharic. (C) Zemichael. Offered
through Penn Language Center
An advanced Amharic course that will further sharpen the students' knowledge of the Amharic
language and the culture of the Amharas. The learners communicative skills will be further developed
through listening, speaking, reading and writing. There will also be discussions on cultural and political
issues.
249. Amharic Language & Culture. (C) Hailu.Prerequisite(s): Completion of Advanced Amharic I & II.
270. (AFRC270, AFST529) Intermediate Yoruba I. (A) Awoyale. Offered through Penn Language
Center
271. (AFRC271, AFRC534, AFST532) Intermediate Yoruba II. (B) Awoyale. Offered through Penn
Language Center
280. (AFRC280, AFST582) Intermediate Swahili I. (A) Mshomba. Offered through Penn Language
Center
281. (AFRC282, AFST583) Intermediate Swahili II. (B) Mshomba.Prerequisite(s): Intermediate
Swahili I, or permission of instructor. Offered through the Penn Language Center
284. (AFRC284, AFST584) Advanced Swahili I. (A) Mshomba.Prerequisite(s): AFST 280, LING 280,
AFRC 280 or permission of instructor. Offered through Penn Language Center
This is an advanced Kiswahili course which will engage learners in extended spoken and written
discourse. Advanced learners of Kiswahili will listen to, read about, write and speak on authentic video
materials, contemporary novels, and newspapers. They will also participate in various discussions on
cultural and political issues.

Page 10 of 14

AFRICAN STUDIES
(AS) {AFST}
285. (AFRC285, AFST586) Advanced Swahili II. (B) Mshomba. Offered through Penn Language
Center
370. (AFST587) Advanced Yoruba I. (A) Awoyale. Offered through Penn Language Center
371. (AFST588) Advanced Yoruba II. (B) Awoyale. Offered through Penn Language Center
399. Independent Study: Language. (C) Staff. Offered through Penn Language Center
460. (ANEL460) Middle Egyptian. (E) Silverman.
Introduction to the grammar of Middle Egyptian.
470. TWI LANGUAGE & CULTURE I.
471. TWI LANG & CULTURE II.
484. (AFST590) Swahili Lang/Culture I. (M) Mshomba.Prerequisite(s): Completion of Advanced
Swahili I & II.
This course taught in Swahili will focus on reading/writing skills and speaking/listening skills as well as
structural and cultural information. The course will be structured around three thematic units: History,
Politics, and Education. The course will provide background on the Swahili-speaking world: Who were
the first Swahili speakers and what varieties of the language did they speak? How did Swahili spread
from the coast to other Swahili-speaking areas as far inland as Uganda, Rwanda, and Congo? Swahili
is a lingua franca and has importance in the spread of religion and trade movements. Influences of
other languages on Swahili and influences of Swahili on local languages will be discussed. Political
and educational systems will be discussed as well.
486. Yoruba Language & Culture I. (M) Awoyale.Prerequisite(s): Completion of Advanced Yoruba I &
II. Offered through Penn Language Center
487. Yoruba Language & Culture II. (C) Awoyale.Prerequisite(s): Completion of Advanced Yoruba I &
II.
490. (AFST594) African Language Tutorial - Elementary I. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Permission of
Penn Language Center. Offered through Penn Language Center
The main objective of this course is to allow students to study an African language of their choice,
depending on the availability of the instructor. The course will provide students with linquistics tools
which will facilitate their research work in the target country. Cultural aspects of the speakers of the
language will be introduced and reinforced.
491. (AFRC491, AFST595) African Language Tutorial - Elementary II. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s):
Permission of Penn Language Center. Offered through Penn Language Center
Continuation of AFST 490.
495. (AFRC495, AFST599) African Language Tutor: Adv II Languages will be specified in each
section. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Permission of Penn Language Center.
Continuation of AFST 494.

Page 11 of 14

AFRICAN STUDIES
(AS) {AFST}
492. (AFST596) African Language Tutorial - Intermediate I. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Permission of
Penn Language Center. Offered through Penn Language Center
493. (AFRC493, AFST597) African Language Tutorial - Intermediate II. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s):
Permission of Penn Language Center. Offered through Penn Language Center
Continuation of AFST 492.
494. (AFST598) African Language Tutorial - Advanced I. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Permission of
Penn Language Center. Offered through Penn Language Center
496. Lanugage & Culture I. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Permission of Penn Language Center. Offered
Through Penn Language Center
Aspects of the targeted language's history, language, and culture.
509. (ARAB534) Arabic: Reading Historical Manuscripts. (M) Staff.
Arabic language is used by many societies not only in communication but also in correspondence and
in documenting the affairs of their daily lives. Arabic script is adopted by many groups who native
languages are not Arabic, in writing their language before some moved to the roman alphabet. In
many historical documents specific style of writing and handwriting are dominant. This specificity is
influenced by the dialectical variations, the historical development of each region and the level of
Arabic literacy and use.
517. (AFRC170, AFST170, AFST518) Elementary Yoruba I. (A) Awoyale. Offered through Penn
Language Center
This is an introductory course in Yoruba whose goals are to introduce students to the history,
geographical location of the people who speak Yoruba, their culture, customs, and traditions; and, to
enable students to develop communicative skills through listening, speaking, reading and writing.
518. (AFRC171, AFRC517, AFST171, AFST517) Elementary Yoruba II. (B) Awoyale. Offered through
Penn Language Center
The main objective of this course is to further sharpen the Yoruba linquistic knowledge that the student
acquired in level I. By the end of the course, the student should be able to (1) read, write, and
understand simple to moderately complex sentences in Yoruba; and (2) advance in the knowledge of
the Yoruba culture.
529. (AFRC270, AFST270) Intermediate Yoruba I. (A) Awoyale. Offered through Penn Language
Center
532. (AFRC271, AFRC534, AFST271) Intermediate Yoruba II. (B) Awoyale. Offered through Penn
Language Center
540. (AFRC240, AFRC540, AFST240, NELC481) Elementary Amharic I. (A) Hailu. Offered through
Penn Language Center
An introductory course for students with no previous knowledge of Amharic. Amharic belongs to the
southern branch of Hemeto-Semitic languages which is also referred to as "Afrasian." Amharic is the
official language of Ethiopia and is spoken by 14 million native Amharas and by approximately 18
million of the other ethic groups in Ethiopia. The goals of this course are to introduce students to the
culture, customs, and traditions of the Amharas. Students will develop communicative skills through
listening, speaking, reading and writing.

Page 12 of 14

AFRICAN STUDIES
(AS) {AFST}
541. (AFRC241, AFRC541, AFST241, NELC482) Elementary Amharic II. (B) Hailu. Offered through
Penn Language Center
Continuation of Elementary Amharic I.
543. (AFRC242, AFRC543, AFST242, NELC483) Intermediate Amharic I. (A) Hailu.
Offered through Penn Language Center
544. (AFRC243, AFRC544, AFST243, NELC484) Intermediate Amharic II. (B) Hailu.
Offered through Penn Language Center
547. (AFRC247, AFRC548, AFST247, NELC583) Advanced Amharic. (C) Hailu. Offered through
Penn Language Center
An advanced Amharic course that will further sharpen the students' knowledge of the Amharic
language and the culture of the Amharas. The learners communicative skills will be further developed
through listening, speaking, reading and wwriting. There will also be discussions on cultural and
political issues.
563. (ANEL563) Old Egyptian. (C) Silverman.
This course is an introduction to the language of the Egyptian Old Kingdom. The grammar of the
period will be introduced during the early part of the semester, using Ededl's ALTAGYPTISCHE
GRAMMATIK as the basic reference. Other grammatical studies to be utilized will include works by
Allen, Baier, Polotsky, Satzinger, Gilula, Doret, and Silverman. The majority of the time in the course
will be devoted to reading varied textual material: the unpublished inscriptions in the tomb of the Old
Kingdom official Kapure--on view in the collection of the University Museum; several autobiographical
inscriptions as recorded by Sethe in URKUNDEN I; and a letter in hieratic (Baer, ZAS 03. 1077. 1-9).
580. (AFRC180, AFST180) Elementary Swahili I. (A) Mshomba. Offered through Penn Language
Center
Beginning level of Swahili which provides training and practice in speaking, reading and writing with
initial emphasis on speaking and listening. Basic grammar, vocabulary and cultural skills learned
gradually with priority on the spoken language. Especially during the second term, folktales, other
texts and films will be used to help introduce important aspects of Swahili culture.
581. (AFRC181, AFST181) Elementary Swahili II. (B) Mshomba. Offered through Penn Language
Center
This course continues to introduce basic grammar, vocabulary, and the reading and writing of Swahili
to new speakers. During this term, folktales, other texts, and film selections are used to help introduce
important aspects of Swahili culture and the use of the language in wide areas of Africa.
582. (AFRC280, AFST280) Intermediate Swahili I. (A) Mshomba. Offered through Penn Language
Center
583. (AFRC282, AFST281) Intermediate Swahili II. (B) Mshomba. Offered through Penn Language
Center

Page 13 of 14

AFRICAN STUDIES
(AS) {AFST}
584. (AFRC284, AFST284) Advanced Swahili I. (C) Mshomba. Offered through Penn Language
Center
This is an advanced Kiswahili course which will engage learners in extended spoken and written
discourse. Advanced learners of Kiswahili will listen to, read about, write and speak on authentic video
materials, contemporary novels, and newspapers. They will also participate in various discussions on
cultural and political issues.
586. (AFRC285, AFST285) Advanced Swahili II. (C) Mshomba. Offered through Penn Language
Center
587. (AFST370) Advanced Yoruba I. (A) Awoyale. Offered through Penn Language Center
588. (AFST371) Advanced Yoruba II. (B) Awoyale. Offered through Penn Language Center
594. (AFST490) Afr Lang Tutor: Elem I. (A)
595. (AFST491) African Language Tutorial - Elementary II. (M)
597. (AFST493) African Language Tutorial - Intermediate II.
598. (AFST494) AFR LANG TUTOR: ADV I.

Page 14 of 14

