ASIAN LANGUAGES
(AS) {ALAN}
121. BEGINNING FILIPINO II.
131. BEGINNING THAI II. (E)
231. INTERMEDIATE THAI II.

EAST ASIAN NON-LANGUAGE COURSES IN LITERATURE, HISTORY
AND CULTURE
110. Elementary Vietnamese I & II. (C) Nguyen.Prerequisite(s): For the second semester,
completion of the first semester or permission of the instructor. Offered through the Penn
Language Center.
An introduction to the language of North and South Vietnam. Instruction includes reading,
writing, speaking and listening.
120. Beginning Filipino I & II. (E) Juliano.Prerequisite(s): For the second semester,
completion of the first semester of ALAN 120 or permission of the instructor. Offered through
the Penn Language Center.
An introduction to the spoken and written Tagalog (Filipino) language. This will prepare and
develop students' basic skills in speaking, listening, reading and writing Filipino at its
beginning level.
130. Beginning Thai I & II. (E) Staff.Prerequisite(s): For the second semester, completion of
the first semester or permission of the instructor. Offered through the Penn Language
Center.
An introduction to the spoken and written Thai language.
210. Intermediate Vietnamese I & II. (C) Nguyen.Prerequisite(s): ALAN 110 or equivalent.
For the second semester, completion of the first semester or permission of the instructor.
Offered through the Penn Language Center.
A continuation of ALAN 110, the written and spoken language of Vietnam.
220. Intermediate Filipino I & II. (E) Juliano.Prerequisite(s): For the second semester,
completion of the first semester of ALAN 220 or permission of the instructor. Offered through
the Penn Language Center.
A continuation of ALAN 120, the spoken and written Tagalog (Filipino) language. This course
will develop the communicative competence of the students in handling limited
communicative tasks, reading simple connected texts and writing short dialogues.
230. Intermediate Thai I & II. (E) Staff.Prerequisite(s): The second semester of ALAN130 or
permission of the instructor. For the second semester, completion of the first semester or
permission of the instructor. Offered through the Penn Language Center.
A continuation of ALAN 130, the spoken and written Thai language.

Page 1 of 1

