ANCIENT HISTORY
(AS) {ANCH}
L/R 025. (HIST024, NELC101) Ancient Middle Eastern History and Civilization. (A) History &
Tradition Sector. All classes. Staff.
A cultural history of Middle Eastern civilization from the invention of writing to the rise of Islam.
L/R 026. (CLST026, HIST026) Ancient Greece. (A) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Jeremy
McInerney.
The Greeks enjoy a special place in the construction of western culture and identity, and yet many of
us have only the vaguest notion of what their culture was like. A few Greek myths at bedtime when we
are kids, maybe a Greek tragedy like Sophokles' Oidipous when we are at school: these are often the
only contact we have with the world of the ancient Mediterranean. The story of the Greeks, however,
deserves a wider audience, because so much of what we esteem in our own culture derives from
them: democracy, epic poetry, lyric poetry, tragedy, history writing, philosophy, aesthetic taste, all of
these and many other features of cultural life enter the West from Greece. The oracle of Apollo at
Delphi had inscribed over the temple, "Know Thyself." For us, that also means knowing the Greeks.
We will cover the period from the Late Bronze Age, c. 1500 BC, down to the time of Philip of Macedon,
c. 350 BC, concentrating on the two hundred year interval from 600-400 BC.
L/R 027. (CLST027, HIST027) Ancient Rome. (B) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Cam Grey.
The Roman Empire was one of the few great world states-one that unified a large area around the
Mediterranean Sea-an area never subsequently united as part of a single state. Whereas the great
achievements of the Greeks were in the realm of ideas and concepts (democracy, philosophy, art,
literature, drama) those of the Romans tended to be in the pragmatic spheres of ruling and controlling
subject peoples and integrating them under the aegis of an imperial state. Conquest, warfare,
administration, and law making were the great successes of the Roman state. We will look at this
process from its inception and trace the formation of Rome's Mediterranean empire over the last three
centuries BC; we shall then consider the social, economic and political consequences of this great
achievement, especially the great political transition from the Republic (rule by the Senate) to the
Principate (rule by emperors). We shall also consider limitations to Roman power and various types of
challenges, military, cultural, and religious, to the hegemony of the Roman state. Finally, we shall try to
understand the process of the development of a distinctive Roman culture from the emergence new
forms of literature, like satire, to the gladiatorial arena as typical elements that contributed to a Roman
social order.
046. (NELC046, RELS014) Myths and Religions of the Ancient World. (B) History & Tradition
Sector. All classes. Frame.
This course will survey the religions of the ancient Middle East, situating each in its historical and
socio-cultural context and focusing on the key issues of concern to humanity: creation, birth, the place
of humans in the order of the universe, death, and destruction. The course will cover not only the
better-known cultures from the area, such as Egypt and Mesopotamia, but also some lesser-known
traditions, such as those of the Hurrians, or of the ancient Mediterranean town of Ugarit. Religion will
not be viewed merely as a separate, sealed-off element of the ancient societies, but rather as an
element in various cultural contexts, for example, the relationship between religion and magic and the
role of religion in politics will be recurring topics in the survey. Background readings for the lectures will
be drawn not only from the modern scholarly literature, but also from the words of the ancients
themselves in the form of their myths, rituals, and liturgies.

Page 1 of 8

ANCIENT HISTORY
(AS) {ANCH}
SM 115. (CLST115) Ancient Rome and America. Grey.
For centuries the cultures of ancient Greece and Rome have been considered the "foundation" of
Western society, and the influence of Classical Antiquities continues to be felt in central areas of
modern life, from art and literature to politics and science. Yet in recent years the Greco-Roman
Classics have become the center of a vibrant debate about our very definition of "western civilization"
and the values and attitudes that this concept traditionally entails. This course will introduce students
to the amazingly rich and dynamic cultures of Classical Antiquity, allowing them to experience many of
the most exciting aspects of ancient culture, and to evaluate for themselves the legacy of the classical
past in the West. The course will involve, among other things, the study of various aspects of GrecoRoman history, literature, art, philosophy, and politics.
116. PERICLEAN ATHENS.
SM 117. (CLST117) PERICLEAN ATHENS.
This class is devoted to the culture and history of Athens in the 5th century BC, the golden age of
Greek culture. We will examine such topics as the growth of democracy, Athenian religion and the
architectural embellishment of the Acropolis and the Agora. We will look at the development of
Athenian drama and explore the relationship between Athenian democracy and naval power.
119. (CLST118) AUGUSTAN CULTRL REVOL. (C)
146. (CLST146) Ancient Mediterranean Empires. (A) Wilker.
What constituted an empire in antiquity and how was imperialism legitimized? Which measures were
used to maintain and organize imperial power? How did foreign rule affect the daily life of people all
over the Mediterranean? In this course we will discuss and compare ancient empires from
Achaemenid Persia to Alexander the Great and the Hellenistic kingdoms of his successors to the
emergence of Rome as one of the most successful and influential empires in world history. Topics that
will be discussed include ancient ideas and concepts of imperial rule, patterns of political, economic
and cultural power and their interrelations as well as imperial crises and local resistance. All texts will
be discussed in translation. There are no prerequisites, although it would be useful to have some
background in ancient history.
209. (CLST209) Structures of the Roman Empire. (M) Grey.
"They create a desert and call it peace," wrote Tacitus in describing the response of the conquered to
Rome's power, but the Roman Peace also brought with it it other, less dramatic changes. In this class
we will break the Roman Empire down down into a series of vignettes, using literature and
archaeology to supply us us with the material for a fresh look at Roman society. Our aim is to uncover
the complexity of Roman society, and to acknowledge the multiple voices that together made up the
ancient Mediterranean world. We will focus upon key structural aspects of Roman society and culture,
but explore them in new ways, using texts that highlight dissent, conflict and tension as they indicate
cohesion and Rome's hegemony over the Mediterranean in antiquity. Texts will be read in translation.
No prerequisites, although students are encouraged to take this course after taking ANCH 027/HIST


Page 2 of 8

ANCIENT HISTORY
(AS) {ANCH}
SM 220. (NELC284) Near East in Hellenistic and Roman Times. (M) Wilker.
In this course, we will study the history of the Hellenistic and Roman period a from a Near Eastern
perspective. From the conquests of Alexander the Great to the end of Roman rule in late antiquity, this
region was the scene of conflicts, but also of peaceful and fruitful interactions between Greeks,
Romans, Egyptians, Jews, Syrians, Arabs and many other societies. What was the impact of Greek
and Roman rule and how did the inhabitants of the region react to these fundamental changes? On
the other hand, how did they influence the culture and worldview of their conquerors? We will use
historical texts, documents and archaeological evidence to discuss the political, cultural and religious
encounters that made the Near East a key region of Greco-Roman history. All texts will be discussed
in translation. No prerequisites, although it would be useful to have taken ANCH 026 and/or 
SM 257. RELIGION & THE POLIS.
SM 301. (CLST300) Problems in Greek and Roman History. (M) Grey.
The neat, comforting narratives that we construct of the histories of ancient Greece and Rome cover
up a collection of controversies and debates that continue to rage in contemporary scholarship. Can
we use the Homeric epics as sources of early Greek history? Who was responsible for the
Peloponnesian War? How can we best explain Rome's acquisition of empire? How new was the
political revolution of Augustus? What were the main reasons for the rise of Christianity? In this
course, we explore these and other controversies, focusing on both modern scholarship and the
ancient sources. All texts will be discussed in translation. No prior knowledge of Ancient History is
required, although it would be useful to have taken ANCH 026 and/or ANCH 027.
302. Cleopatra. Julia Wilker.
Cleopatra VII (70/69 30 BCE) is one of the most famous women in world history She has been
remembered, admired, and reproached as a power-hungry Hellenistic queen, as the last pharaoh of
Egypt, as a self-confident female ruler, and as the vicious seductress of Julius Caesar and Mark
Antony. Her supposedly extravagant lifestyle, her political schemes, but also her integrity in choosing
suicide over submission have inspired poets, artists, and historians from her own time to our modern
world. In this seminar, we will take a closer look at some of the common perceptions and stereotypes
that have shaped the image of Cleopatra for more than 2000 years. The main focus, however, will be
on the historical queen, her biography, and the political and cultural contexts of her life. We will use
ancient literary texts, papyri, inscriptions, coins, and archaeological evidence to analyze Cleopatras
rise to power, how she presented herself to her subjects and how she was perceived by others, as well
as her role in the tumultuous events that led to the end of the Hellenistic period and the rise of imperial
Rome under the rule of Augustus.
SM 305. (JWST305) Jewish Diaspora in the Roman Empire. Julia Wilker.
Under the Roman Empire, Jewish communities developed and flourished especially in the cities of the
Eastern Mediterranean, in Egypt, Syria, Asia Minor, Greece, Northern Africa, and Italy proper. In many
of these cities, the Jews formed a considerable part of the population; they influenced the cultural,
social, and political communal life and developed an identity that was distinctively different from that in
Judea. In this seminar, we will trace Jewish life in the Diaspora under Roman rule. How did Jews and
non-Jews interact? What was the legal status of Jewish communities under the Roman Empire? What
caused conflicts and how were they solved? What can the history of Jewish Diaspora communities tell
us about minorities in the Roman Empire in general? We will use literary texts, inscriptions, papyri, and
archaeological material to answer these questions and many more.

Page 3 of 8

ANCIENT HISTORY
(AS) {ANCH}
SM 330. (CLST332) History of Macedonia. (M)
In this course, we will study the rise and development of Macedonia from a tiny kingdom on the
northern fringes of the Greek world to one of the major powers of the region and beyond. Regarded by
the Greeks as an at least semi-barbarian culture on the periphery, Macedonia became the dominant
power in the Greek world during the fourth century BC and its king Alexander the Great set out to
conquer the world. After his death, Macedonia was one of the Hellenistic kingdoms competing for
power and influence in the Mediterranean until it finally came under Roman control. Topics that will be
discussed include questions of ethnicity and identity, Macedonian kingship, culture and society
(including the role of women) and the role of Macedonian traditions in the Hellenistic era in general.
Special emphasis will be laid on the discussion of ancient texts and documents as well as
archaeological evidence.
307. MARGINALITY.
Conventional histories of Rome tend to focus on the actions of the named individuals who wrote the
texts that have come down to us, or are the subjects of those texts. But these individuals constituted
only the tiniest fraction of the population of the Roman world. In this course, we will explore the
livedlived experience of the other 95%: peasants and the poor; prostitutes, pimps, and criminals;
bandits and pirates; magicians and soothsayers. Drawing on the scattered and problematic textual
sources, archaeological evidence and comparative perspectives from better-documented contexts, we
will examine the various roles that these individuals played in Roman society, the collection of often
discordant or dissonant attitudes of their wealthier and more powerful contemporaries, and the
challenges and opportunities that attend the social history of marginality in the ancient world. No prior
knowledge of Roman History is required, although it would be useful to have taken ANCH 027, the
introductory survey course. Texts will be discussed in translation.
SM 311. (CLST311) Disasters in the Ancient World. (M) Grey.
Natural disasters occupy a powerful place in our imagination. Stories of floodsplagues, earthquakes
and storms excite and horrify us, and communities mobilizetheir resources quickly in response to
these events. In the ancient Mediterranean world, natural disasters could take on potent meaning,
indicating the anger or disfavor of the gods, acting as warnings against certain courses of action, or
confirmations of individuals' fears or suspicions about the world in which they lived. In this course, we
explore the evidence for some disasters in the ancient Mediterranean world, the ways in which
contemporaries reacted to those disasters and interpreted their causes. This project is, of necessity,
multidisciplinary, involving textual, archaeological, geological, and comparative materials and drawing
on methodologies from history, political and archaeological science, and the emerging field of disaster
studies. In the process, we will gain an appreciation of the socialstructures of communities in the
period, the thought-world in which they operated, and the challenges and opportunities thatattend a
project of this sort. No prior knowledge of Ancient History is required, although it would be useful to
have taken an introductory survey course. Texts will be discussed in translation

Page 4 of 8

ANCIENT HISTORY
(AS) {ANCH}
323. (CLST323, HIST334) Greek World After Alexander the Great. (M) Wilker.
This class is designed as a detailed investigation of the world created by Alexander the Great. We will
cover the three hundred year period known as the Hellenistic Age from the career of Alexander the
Great (354-323 BC) until the defeat of Antony and Cleopatra at the Battle of Actium (31 BC). This was
a period during which the world of the Greeks underwent extraordinary and far-reaching changes, as
Greek culture was established as far afield as northwestern India, central Asia and Egypt. In the same
period kingdoms controlled by Alexanders's Successors used Greek culture to define their rule,
establishing a Greek culture of the elite in regions which previously had been dominated by the
Persians. As Greek and non-Greek worlds collided, a new interpretation of Greek culture emerged,
giving rise, among other things, to universities and professional schools, state subsidized health care,
triumphalist architecture, the heroization of the noble savage, coinage with royal portraits, the
deification of men and a multitude of other social, artistic and political forms familiar to us. It was an
age of radical change, dislocation, as Greek populations colonized regions previously unkown to them.
334. (CLST334) JERUSALEM IN ANTIQUITY. (M)
357. (CLST357, RELS257) Religion and the Polis. McInerney.
SM 384. (NELC384) The Hellenistic and Roman Near East. Julia Wilker.
In this course we will study the history of the Hellenistic and Roman period from a Near Eastern
perspective. From the conquests of Alexander the Great to the end of Roman rule in late antiquity, this
region was the scene of conflicts, but also of peaceful and fruitful interactions between Greeks,
Romans, Egyptians, Jews, Syrians, Arabs and many other societies. What was the impact of Greek
and Roman rule and how did the peoples of the region react to these fundamental changes? On the
other hand, how did they influence the culture and worldview of their conquerors? We will use
historical texts, documents and archaeological evidence to discuss these political, cultural and
religious encounters that made the Near East to a key region of Greco-Roman history. All texts will be
discussed in translation. No prerequisites, although it would be useful to have some background in
Hellenistic and/or Roman history.
399. Independent Study. (C)
This course is taken by students doing independent work with a faculty advisor, such as students
approved to work on a senior research paper in pursuit of honors in the major.
499. Independent Study. (C)
SM 500. (LATN600) HISTORIA AGUSTA. (M)
SM 534. Problems in Roman Hist. (M) Jeremy McInerney.

Page 5 of 8

ANCIENT HISTORY
(AS) {ANCH}
SM 501. Comparative Law and Legal Systems of Late Antiquity: Islamic and Roman Law. Cam
Grey.
This seminar explores the possibilities for comparative study of Late Antique law and legal systems by
focusing on Roman and Islamic law, with reference also to neighboring legal cultures. There is no
shortage of scholarship on the legal systems of the Islamic and Roman worlds. Fictitious legal
discussions, juristic judgments and edicts issued directly or indirectly by rulers have all been
scrutinized for the light they shed upon the legal thinking that characterized these two societies.
Equally, these texts are a rich and intriguing source of information for social, cultural, and economic
historians. They illuminate social customs, economic and social divisions within society, and attitudes
towards those customs and divisions. They reveal ongoing and periodic threats to the smooth
functioning of society, and measures taken to address those threats. In this course, we take a broadly
comparative approach to the problem of reconstructing both the legal and the societal systems of the
Islamic and Roman worlds. We explore differences and similarities in the nature of the sources and
methodologies that are central to the modern study of Roman and Islamic law, consider how those
similarities and differences affect scholars ability to shed light upon political, religious, and
employ documentary and literary evidence to reconstruct the societies in question.
510. (LATN510) Latin Historical Documents. (M) Staff.
The analysis of non-literary Latin texts from antiquity preserved on various types of permanent media,
mainly stone and metal, is the primary concern of the discipline of Latin epigraphy. Such texts, which
have been recovered in hundreds of thousands, constitute one of the most important sources of data
for the modern-day historian of Rome. The student will be introduced to the conventions of editing and
reading epigraphical texts, and to the major collections of Latin inscriptions. The seminar will then
concentrate on different types of documents in order to understand their formatting and style, as well
as the kinds of historical evidence that can be derived from them. Public and private inscriptions, from
the decrees of emperors and senatorial careers to personal curse tablets and the simple tombstone
epitaphs of the urban poor, will be considered as examples of the range of epigraphical texts available
to the modern researcher.
SM 512. Methods in Roman History. Staff.
SM 535. (AAMW534, HIST535, LATN600) Problems in Greek and Roman History: Roman Empire.
(C) Cam Grey.
This course will explore some of the pressing and problematic scholarly debates in the historiography
of the Roman imperial period, from the accession of the first emperor, Augustus, to the reign of
Justinian (ruled 527-363 CE). Students will gain a familiarity with both the broad historical narratives of
the Roman empire and the details of specific scholarly disagreements in the intellectual, political,
socio-economic, and cultural history of the period.
542. (AAMW543, NELC242, NELC542) Empires Anc Near East.
SM 601. (AAMW601, CLST601) Archaeology and Greek History. (C) Staff.

Page 6 of 8

ANCIENT HISTORY
(AS) {ANCH}
SM 602. Athenian Economy. (M)
This course will examine the material and social culture of classical Athens. Through a close reading
of original sources (primarily court presentation and comic productions) and through the evaluation of
modern studies, we will seek to understand the societal,familial, economic, religious and sexual
dimensions of the Athenian life, and to evaluate the alleged dictorial dominance of this society by the
small minority of male "citizens." The class will deal with such topics as the legal, social and fiancial
position of wealthy slaves and business women; the clandestine economy of tax evasion and bank
fraud; the political and economic content of male and female prostitution.
The entire seminar will study certain core materials, and individual students will report on selected
subjects. Admission is open to those with a reading knowledge of ancient Greek and/or some
expertise in social science discipline broadly-defined (such as history, gender studies, economics,
anthropology or law).
SM 604. Provincial Perspectives. (M) Wilker.
Most of the primary sources available to us reflect the ideology, concepts and realities of Hellenistic
and Roman imperial rule through the lenses of ruling power and its elites. There are, however, a
number of sources that provide insights into how provincials and subjects saw and depicted
themselves, the imperial power and their interaction. Historiographical and auto-ethnographic works,
orations, philosophical and religious texts reflect different attitudes towards the ruling imperial powers
ranging from open hostility and frustrated acceptance to praise and even identification. In this seminar
we will focus on how ethnic, religious, cultural and/or regional identities were developed, maintained,
adapted and interpreted within and in reaction to the imperial frameworks of the Hellenistic and
Roman periods. Texts to be read and discussed include some "canonical" authors such as Polybius
and Flavius Josephus as well as some lesser-known works and fragments from authors like Berossus,
Manetho, Nicolaus of Damascus, and Poseidonius and will be complemented by documentary,
epigraphic and archaeological evidence. Special emphasis will also be laid on modern scholarly
approaches, including concepts of identity, hybridization and cultural change and the dynamics of
empire in general.
645. (ANTH645) Economics and Ancient Trade. (M) Staff.
This course will examine theoretical and impirical frameworks for pre-modern forms of exchange. We
will focus on substantist and formalist economic theories and will consider the archaeological evidence
for such phenomena as barter, gift exchange, administered economies, markets, local exchange, and
long distance overland and maritime trade. Our goal is to develop mid-range models for reconstructing
ancient economies. The course will emphasize but not be limited to complex societies of the New and
Old World.
SM 605. REVOLTS IN THE ROMAN EMP. Julia Wilker. Corequisite(s): REVOLTS IN THE ROMAN
EMPIRE.
Provincial revolts were a common feature in the Roman Empire. Although many of these revolts have
attracted much interest in modern scholarship, they are often analyzed as individual events and/or in
their particular regional context alone. In this seminar, we will focus on the first and second century CE
and discuss provincial revolts and resistance in Judaea, Egypt, Africa, Germany, Britain, Pannonia,
Gaul and many more. Yet the aim of this course is not to come up with (another) narrative for each of
these revolts, but a comparative analysis of their causes, the organization and goals of rebel
movements, the imperial reaction, and the following reintegration process into the empire.
SM 611. (AAMW611, CLST611, GREK611) Greek Epigraphy. (M) Staff.
An introduction to the principles and practices of Greek Epigraphy. Study of selected Greek
inscriptions.

Page 7 of 8

ANCIENT HISTORY
(AS) {ANCH}
SM 616. (CLST616) Ancient Economies. (C) Grey.
Scholars have long debated the nature of the ancient economy, the terms in which it can best be
approached, and the decision-making processes that underpinned economic behavior in antiquity. In
particular, controversy has surrounded the extent to which the economies of Greco-Roman antiquity
can be modeled using contemporary tools of analysis. In recent scholarship, many of the tenets laid
down by Moses Finley in his The Ancient Economy have been re-evaluated, with the result that the
field is currently in a state of intellectual ferment. It is the purpose of this course to explore the terms in
which contemporary debates over ancient economic systems are formulated, with reference to a
variety of societies and periods, from the palace economies of the Mycenaean period to the system of
taxation introduced in the early fourth century by the emperor Diocletian and his colleagues in the
Tetrarchy.
SM 702. (AAMW702, CLST702) Greek Sanctuaries. (M) McInerney.
Sanctuaries remain an important focal point for the study of Greek religion. Both as sites for worship,
dedication, oracular activity and other cult activity and as sites for the mediation of elite and state
competition sanctuaries are, along with the polis, the most essential structuring institutions of Greek
life. This seminar takes a selection of larger and smaller extra-urban sanctuaries and examines their
growth, articulation and function.
SM 721. (AAMW721, ARTH721) Seminar in Greek Architecture. (M) Haselberger.
Topic varies.
999. Independent Study. (C)

Page 8 of 8

