ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
001. Introduction to Archaeology. (C) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Staff.
An introduction to the history, concepts, and methods of the anthropological study of pre-historic and
historic peoples using archaeological illustrations to indicate the relationship of archaeological
interpretations with cultural and physical anthropology.
002. INTRODUCTION TO CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY. (C) Society Sector. All classes. Staff.
An introduction to the study of culture and human institutions, how they change, and their role in both
literate and nonliterate societies.
003. Introduction to Human Evolution. (C) Living World Sector. All classes. Staff.
How did humans evolve? When did humans start to walk on two legs? How are humans related to
non-human primates? This course focuses on the scientific study of human evolution describing the
emergence, development, and diversification of our species, Homo sapiens. First we cover the
fundamental principles of evolutionary theory and some of the basics of genetics and heredity as they
relate to human morphological, physiological, and genetic variation. We then examine what studies of
nonhuman primates (monkeys and apes) can reveal about our own evolutionary past, reviewing the
behavioral and ecological diversity seen among living primates. We conclude the course examining the
"hard" evidence of human evolution - the fossil and material culture record of human history from our
earliest primate ancestors to the emergence of modern Homo sapiens. You will also have the
opportunity, during recitations, to conduct hands-on exercises collecting and analyzing behavioral,
morphological, and genetic data on both humans and nonhuman primates and working with the
Department of Anthropology's extensive collection of fossil casts.
004. The Modern World and Its Cultural Background. (B) Humanities & Social Science Sector.
Class of 2010 & beyond. Urban.
An introduction to the diversity of cultures in the world. This course is divided into two parts. The first
briefly examines different models of understanding human diversity: ethnicities, religions, languages,
political forms, economic structures, cultures, and "civilizations". Students will learn to think about the
world as an interconnected whole, and know the significance of culture on a global scale. The second
part is an introduction to area studies, in which we undertake a survey of the different regions of the
world. We conduct the survey paying attention to the different aspects of human diversities, which we
examine in the first part of this course. Students will acquire a greater appreciation and understanding
of cultural differences in the more comprehensive social context.
L/R 005. Great Transformations. (C) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Ristvet.
This course explores the history and archaeology of the last 20,000 years from the development of
agriculture to the industrial revolution. Why did people across the world abandon foraging for farming?
How and why did cities and states develop? Why did societies succeed or fail? How have humans
transformed themselves and the natural world, including the landscape and the climate? We will
explore the methods that archaeologists use to consider these questions and analyze evidence for
social and economic change from the Middle East, the Americas, Asia, Africa, Australia and Europe. In
addition, students will have a chance to conduct hands-on exercises with artifacts from the Penn
Museum and an opportunity to do some experimental archaeology during recitations.

Page 1 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
L/R 012. (HIST012, SOCI012) Globalization And Its Historical Significance. (C) Humanities &
Social Science Sector. Class of 2010 & beyond. Spooner.
This course describes and analyses the current state of globalization and sets it in historical
perspective. It applies the concepts and methods of anthropology, history, political economy and
sociology to the analysis and interpretation of what is actually happening in the course of the semester
that relates to the progress of globalization. We focus on a series of questions not only about what is
happening but about the growing awareness of it and the consequences of the increasing awareness.
In answering these questions we distinguish between active campaigns to cover the world (e.g.
Christian and Muslim proselytism, free-trade agreements, democratization) and the unplanned
diffusion of new ways of organizing trade, capital flows, tourism and remote interaction via the Internet.
The body of the course deals with particular dimensions of globalization, reviewing both the early and
recent history of each. The overall approach is historical and comparative, setting globalization on the
larger stage of the economic, political and cultural development of various parts of the modern world.
The course is taught collaboratively by an anthropologist, an historian, and a sociologist, offering the
opportunity to compare and contrast distinct disciplinary approaches. It seeks to develop a general
social-science-based theoretical understanding of the various historical dimensions of globalization:
economic, political, social and cultural.
022. (AFRC050, AFST050, FOLK022, MUSC050) World Music and Cultures. (A) Arts & Letters
Sector. All Classes. Muller, Rommen, Sykes. Open to all students
This course examines how we as consumers in the "Western" world engage with musical difference
largely through the products of the global entertainment industry. We examine music cultures in
contact in a variety of ways-- particularly as traditions in transformation. Students gain an
understanding of traditional music as live, meaningful person-to-person music making, by examining
the music in its original site of production, and then considering its transformation once it is removed,
and recontextualized in a variety of ways. The purpose of the course is to enable students to become
informed and critical consumers of "World Music" by telling a series of stories about particular
recordings made with, or using the music of, peoples culturally and geographically distant from the US.
Students come to understand that not all music downloads containing music from unfamiliar places
are the same, and that particular recordings may be embedded in intriguing and controversial
narratives of production and consumption. At the very least, students should emerge from the class
with a clear understanding that the production, distribution, and consumption of world music is rarely a
neutral process.

Page 2 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
SM 055. (NELC033) Cultural Heritage, Politics and War in the Middle East. (M) al Kuntar.
Political upheaval in the Middle East has brought cultural heritage studies to the forefront. From playing
a role in the making of national identity and economy of Middle Eastern countries to falling prey to
armed conflicts, cultural heritage remains an important element of the political and social scene. This
seminar will examine the relatedness of cultural heritage to questions of identity and politics in the
Middle East, and the impact of recent wars on such heritage. The seminar will start by outlining the
ancient and modern history of the Middle East, and reviewing the production of cultural heritage and
its contemporary management in several Middle Eastern countries. It will then proceed to discuss the
following major topics:
1) Cultural diversity of modern Middle Eastern societies, the perception of cultural heritage in these
societies, and the survival of long-living historical places, old traditions, and material culture of all
kinds. 2) The influence of ancient cultures on common fixation and beliefs of modern identity in Middle
Eastern societies (e.g. particular ethnic and religious group see themselves as direct descendents of
one or a number of ancient groups such as Phoenicians, Israelites, Assyrians). 3) The use of
archeological and historical data to create narratives of the past that promote specific political
ideologies in the modern Middle East and, in some cases fabricate novel cultural and political realities.
4) The damage done to Cultural Heritage by recent wars in Iraq, Syria, and Lebanon, and (i) how
these wars are/were the makers of a new time that disrupted the living past through the destruction of
cultural landscapes; and (ii) the involvement of cultural heritage institutions and archaeologists in
rescuing cultural heritage in the event of war.
SM 086. Desire and Demand: Culture and Consumption in the Global Marketplace. (M) DiggsThompson. Freshman Seminar
Does consumption shape culture or does culture shape consumption? As even the most mundane
purchase becomes socially symbolic and culturally meaningful we can persuasively argue that the
concept of "need" has been transformed. Analyzing a variety of physical and virtual consumer venues,
the goal of this seminar is to understand and to analyze historical and contemporary issues related to
a culture of consumption. We investigate social and political-economic factors that impact when and
how people purchase goods and argue that behavior attached to consumption includes a nexus of
influences that may change periodically in response to external factors. Readings and research
assignments are interdisciplinary and require a critical analysis of global/local linkages. The city of
Philadelphia becomes the seminar's laboratory as we ask how have issues of culture, consumption,
and global capitalism become intertwined around the world?
100. (ANTH654, NELC281, NELC681, SAST161) Topics In Anthropology and the Modern World:
Afghanistan, Iran, Pakistan. (B) Spooner.
This course relates anthropological models and methods to current problems in the Modern World.
The overall objective is to show how the research findings and analytical concepts of anthropology
may be used to illuminate and explain events as they have unfolded in the recent news and in the
course of the semester. Each edition of the course will focus on a particular country or region that has
been in the news.

Page 3 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
SM 103. (ANTH630) Empires: From Akkad to America. (C) Ristvet.
Empires have been an enduring phenomenon for more than 4,000 years, from the rise of Akkad in
Mesopotamia to the American invasion in Iraq. How and why do empires emerge? How do empires
work? Why do empires endure (or collapse)? This class will study the origins, structures and
consequences of imperialism by comparing ancient and modern empires from all over the world. In
addition to a study of the political aspects of imperialism, we will analyze the cultural and economic
facets of imperialism, particularly acculturation, cultural hybridity and issues of identity. We will analyze
a wide-range of data, including art and artifacts from the Penn Museum, administrative and historical
records, novels and films. Empires covered may include Egypt, Assyria, Achaemenid Persia, Rome,
Han China, Sassanian Persia, the Abbasid Caliphate, the Mongols, Mughal India, Mali, Inka, Aztec,
Spain, Ottoman, France and America.
104. (BIBB150, GSWS103) Sex and Human Nature. (C) Living World Sector. All classes. SCHURR.
This is an introduction to the scientific study of sex in humans. Within an evolutionary framework, the
course examines genetic, physiological, ecological, social and behavioral aspects of sex in humans.
After providing the basic principles of evolutionary biology, the course will examine the development of
sexual anatomy and physiology. How is sex determined? How is orgasm achieved? Why do girls and
boys develop sexually at different ages? The role of ecology and social life in shaping human mating
patterns will be evaluated through the use of ethnographies and cross-cultural materials on a variety of
human cultures. Does everybody have sex the way we do? Why marry? Are there biological bases for
love? Why do we experience jealousy? Finally, topics relevant to human sexuality today will be
discussed, such as recreational sex, contraception, and sexually transmitted diseases. Examples are
drawn primarily from traditional and modern human societies; data from studies of nonhuman primates
are also considered.
105. Human Adaptation. (C) Monge.
ANTH 105 explores the evolutionary process using humans (Homo sapiens) as a case study. This
complex biological and cultural species is best understood within the framework of evolution as it has
operated for over a billion years. Learn why humans are imperfect, not an end product of evolutionary
change, and are still evolving with unpredictable consequences. Using 3 complexes that have come to
characterize humans (bipedalism, rotary chewers, and big brains) we will trace the evolutionary history
from the first life forms on earth to the human lineage that emerged in just the last 5 million years. The
consequences for humans of this evolutionary history are profound and we witness this everyday in
our own bodies. Touch fossil casts representing the whole of human evolution using the Penn
Museum's prodigious casting program.
106. Anthropological Genetics. (M) Schurr.Prerequisite(s): ANTH 003.
This course explores the use of genetics to understand human biological variation and evolution.
Among the areas of genetics to be explored are dermatoglyphics (fingerprints), craniometrics (skulls
and teeth), anthropometrics (body dimensions), simple Mendelian traits, molecular genetics, genetics
of complex traits (skin color, height, obesity), population genetics, and disease adaptations.

Page 4 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
116. (AFRC116, LALS116) Caribbean Culture and Politics. (M) Thomas.
This course offers anthropological perspectives on the Caribbean as a geo-political and socio-cultural
region, and on contemporary Caribbean diaspora cultures. We will examine how the region's long and
diverse colonial history has structured relationships between race, ethnicity, class, gender and power,
as well as how people have challenged these structures. As a region in which there have been
massive transplantations of peoples and their cultures from Africa, Asia, and Europe, and upon which
the United States has exerted considerable influence, we will question the processes by which the
meeting and mixing of peoples and cultures has occurred. Course readings include material on the
political economy of slavery and the plantation system, family and community life, religious beliefs and
practices, gender roles and ideologies, popular culture, and the differing ways national, ethnic, and
racial identities are expressed on the islands and throughout the Caribbean diaspora.
121. (NELC103, URBS121) Origin and Cultures of Cities. (A) History & Tradition Sector. All classes.
Zettler.
The UN estimates that 2.9 of the world's 6.1 billion people live in cities and that this percentage is
rapidly increasing in many parts of the world. This course examines urban life and urban problems by
providing anthropological perspectives on this distinctive form of human association and land use. First
we will examine the "origin" of cities, focusing on several of the places where cities first developed,
including Mesopotamia and the Valley of Mexico. We will then investigate the internal structure of nonindustrial cities by looking at case studies from around the world and from connections between the
cities of the past and the city in which we live and work today.
139. (NELC182, URBS139) Ancient Civilizations of the World. (M) History & Tradition Sector. All
classes. Zettler.
The archaeology of the complex societies of the Old and New Worlds from the end of the Paleolithic
up to and including the earliest civilizations.
122. Becoming Human. (C) Natural Science & Mathematics Sector. Class of 2010 and beyond. Staff.
Human evolutionary studies is a composite product of the fieldwork of both Paleolithic archaeology
and human paleontology (or what we refer to as "stones and bones"). This marriage of two
subdisciplines of anthropology produces a unique set of data that is intellectually managed and driven
by theories within anthropology as a whole and even beyond -- to fields such as biology, psychology,
and primate ethology, as we try to understand the origins of language, culture, and our unique physical
characteristics. In this course, we will jointly discuss and debate the actual evidence of human
evolution, describing what the actual evidence is and exploring how far can we take these
interpretations.
123. (COMM110) Communication & Culture. (C) Society Sector. All classes. Agha.
The course looks at varieties of human expression -- such as art, film, language and song -- as
communicative practices that connect persons together to form a common culture. Discussion is
centered around particular case studies and ethnographic examples. Examination of communicative
practices in terms of the types of expressive signs they employ, their capacity to formulate and
transmit cultural beliefs and ideals (such as conceptions of politics, nature, and self), and to define the
size and characteristics of groups and communities sharing such ideals. Discussion of the role of
media, social institutions, and technologies of communication (print, electronic). Emphasis on
contemporary communicative practices and the forms of culture that emerge in the modern world.

Page 5 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
SM 133. (LALS133) Native Peoples and the Environment. (M) Erickson. Freshman Seminar
The relationship between the activities of native peoples and the environment is a complex and
contentious issue. One perspective argues that native peoples had little impact on the environment
because of their low population densities, limited technology, and conservation ethic and worldview. At
the other extreme, biodiversity, nature itself, is considered the product of a long history of human
activities. This seminar will examine the myth of the ecologically noble savage, the myth of the pristine
environment, the alliance between native peoples and green politics, and the contribution of native
peoples to appropriate technology, sustainable development and conservation of biodiversity.
141. (ARTH141, COMM141) Public Policy, Museums, and the Ethics of Cultural Heritage. (A)
Leventhal.
This course will focus upon and examine the ethics of international heritage and the role that
Museums play in the preservation of identity and cultural heritage. The mission of this course will be to
inform and educate students about the role of Museums within the 21st century. What is the role and
position of antiquities and important cultural objects in Museums? How should Museums acquire
these objects and when should they be returned to countries and cultural groups? Examples from
current issues will be included in the reading and discussions along with objects and issues within the
Penn Museum.
143. Being Human: Biology, Culture & Human Diversity. (C) Staff.
This course is an exploration of human biology from an evolutionary and biocultural perspective. Under
this light, the class will provide you with general concepts for a better understanding of what it means
to be human. We will see humans as mammals, as primates, and as hominids. We will explore the
basics of human genetics, growth & development, nutrition, disease and life history. Biological variation
in contemporary and past societies will be reviewed in reference to evolutionary processes.
L/R 148. (CLST148, NELC183) Food and Fire: Archaeology in the Laboratory. Humanities & Social
Science Sector. Class of 2010 & beyond. Katherine Moore.
This course will let students explore the essential heritage of human technology through archaeology.
People have been transforming their environment from the first use of fire for cooking. Since then,
humans have adapted to the world they created using the resources around them. We use artifacts to
understand how the archaeological record can be used to trace breakthroughs such as breaking stone
and bone, baking bread, weaving cloth and firing pottery and metals. The seminar will meet in the
Penn Museum's new Center for the Analysis of Archaeological Materials. Students will become familiar
with the Museum's collections and the scientific methods used to study different materials. Class
sessions will include discussions, guest presentations, museum field trips, and hands-on experience in
the laboratory.
SM 151. (ANTH752) Archaeology of American History. (C) History & Tradition Sector. All classes.
Schuyler.
Over the last fifty years archaeologists have been exploring historic sites in the United States dating
from both the Colonial Period and the 19th/20th centuries. What can archaeology now tell us about the
origins of American society, the invasion of North America by various European peoples (Spanish,
English, Dutch), the impact on native peoples, the rise of African American and Asian American
cultures, major crisis (e.g. the revolution, Civil War, and the Great Depression), the settlement of the
Far American West, and the final emergence of a truly national culture in the 20th century? A basic
question will be how an American history based on both archaeology and archival sources is different
and more complete than an image of the past drawn only from written sources.

Page 6 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
190. (AFRC190, AFST190) Introduction to Africa. (A) Society Sector. All classes. Hasty.
During the semester we will focus on people and communities of sub-Saharan Africa and on the ways
people represent, reflect on, and react to various aspects and issues in their lives and the institutions
which dominate their communities. We will focus particularly on the history, contemporary expression,
and inter-relationships among politics, religion, and aesthetic practice. Members of Penn's African
Studies community will share their expertise with the class and introduce the University's Africa
resources. Texts consist of weekly readings, films, and recordings; and class members will be
expected to attend several lectures outside of class.
158. The Neolithic Revolution. (M) Olszewski.
The advent of food production/agriculture in prehistory, sometimes referred to as the "Neolithic
Revolution," represents key economic, social, and biological transitions for human groups. Food
production was characterized by the possibility for the accumulation of food surpluses, which could be
used as a form of wealth. It also resulted in the reorganization of social and ritual life as people settled
more permanently in villages or were involved in pastoral lifeways. Additionally, densely packed living
conditions and a close association with domesticated animals led to the spread of diseases, and new
forms of labor related to farming tasks, as well as diets focused on a narrower range of foods, created
biological stresses in these populations. This course examines several examples of the "Neolithic
Revolution" throughout the world, including the Middle East, China, Europe, Mesoamerica, South
America, and the North American Southwest.
160. (CINE106) Mythology and the Movies. (M) Krasniewicz.
Myths are powerful symbolic stories that shape how we interpret, feel about and act upon the world
around us. They have been important throughout time and across cultures for the help they give
humans as they make their way through social interactions of all kinds. Traditional mythological
subjects of creations, hero quests, and gods and monsters are found in all the non-Western, nonindustrial cultures that anthropologists study. But we can also see similar tales in our own
contemporary American culture, especially in the form of blockbuster movies. This course looks at
popular Hollywood movies as a form of mythology that people use to interpret, organize and make
sense of the world around them. We will be applying theories from anthropology and mythology as well
as analyzing the incorporation of movie mythology into everyday life through fan culture, merchandise,
advertising and related media.
SM 184. Food and Culture. (M) Kauer, J.
In this seminar we will explore the various relationships between food and culture. Readings will draw
from a range of fields aside from anthropology, including psychology, food studies, history, nutrition,
and sociology. We will read about and discuss cross-cultural variation in food habits, the meanings
underlying eating and food in the United States, and the different ways that individuals construct 'self'
and identity through food and eating. Discussion in class will rely on in-depth reading, analysis, and
discussion of the assigned texts. There will be a few short writing assignments throughout the class. In
addition, students will conduct interviews and then write a paper based on both these and research in
the published literature.
199. Independent Study in Anthropology. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Junior or senior standing and
written permission of instructor and undergraduate chair. See Department for Advisor
A study under faculty supervision of a problem area or topic not included in the formal curriculum.

Page 7 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
SM 204. Theoretical Foundations. (M) Thomas.
Ever wonder what the point was of reading the "founding fathers" of the discipline (and yes, they were
most often fathers)? Ever feel like the "old stuff" and the "old questions" have no relevance to your
contemporary interests? This course, designed primarily for cultural anthropology majors, will provide
clues. This is NOT a comprehensive history of the discipline. Instead, we will examine some of the
main issues that have been foundational to anthropology, and will explore how approaches to these
issues have changed over time. To do so, we will contextualize our analysis of transformations in
anthropological knowledge production within historical and contemporary political economies. By
exploring core issues that continue to inspire and inform anthropological theory and ethnographic
practice, we will solidify our commitment to a holistic and relational understanding of social processes.
210. Death: Anthropological Perspectives. (M) Monge.
This course will cover the topic of DEATH from a bio/cultural perspective including the evolution of life
history (aging and demography - mortality) as well as from an archaeological perspective (prehistory)
and early history of mortuary practices. Nothing in the lifespan of humans is so revealing on the
interface of culture and biology as is death and the experience of death. This course is not concerned
specifically with how an individual experiences death, but in the ways that culture and biology have
come to define and deal with physical death and the death experience.
221. (ANTH521, ARTH230, CLST244, NELC284, NELC584) Material World in Archaeological
Science. (M) Boileau/Dibble.
By focusing on the scientific analysis of inorganic archaeological materials, this course will explore
processes of creation in the past. ANTH 221 will take place in the new Center for the Analysis of
Archaeological Materials (CAAM) and will be team taught in three modules: analysis of lithics, analysis
of ceramics and analysis of metals. Each module will combine laboratory and classroom exercises to
give students hands-on experience with archaeological materials. We will examine how the
transformation of materials into objects provides key information about past human behaviors and the
socio-economic contexts of production, distribution, exchange and use. Discussion topics will include
invention and adoption of new technologies, change and innovation, use of fire, and craft
specialization.
218. (EALC018) Globalizing East Asia. (M) Kim.
This course explores the changing culture and society of China, South Korea, and Japan and analyzes
the reactions of ordinary people to these changes. Our course discussion begins with a critical
investigation into traditional societies based on patriarchy, Confucian ethics, and subsistence
agriculture and how they have changed since their initial encounters with expanding global capitalism.
This course then examines how the recently intensifying transnational movements of capital,
commodities, people, and "cultures" have created particular cultural and societal forms in the region.
Drawing on ethnographic, historical, and political literature about the three countries, students can
understand how the particular culture and economy of each country has contributed to creating
different paths of their historical-cultural transformations. Our topics include: changes in traditional
families and gender roles, international wars and massive modernization movements; corporate
culture and its local variations; domestic and international labor migration and the conditions of migrant
workers; international marriages and transnational flow of brides; US-based fast food restaurants and
food crisis; emerging consumerism and commodification of childhood; "odorless" Japanese cultural
products and their popularity in Asian countries.

Page 8 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
SM 219. (ANTH719) Archaeology Field Project. (A) Humanities & Social Science Sector. Class of
2010 & beyond. Schuyler. Permission of instructor required
First-hand participation in research project in historical archaeology in Southern New Jersey.
Transportation provided by the university. Students will assist in excavations and archival research on
local archaeological sites. Class is open to all undergraduates, no previous archaeological experience
is required. Attendance will involve Fridays or Saturdays, all day from 8:00 to 5:00 including travel time
to the excavations and back to the University Museum. Students enroll for only one day (F or S).
Enrollment is limited so specific permission of the instructor is required (Robert L. Schuyler:
schuyler@sas.upenn.edu; (215)898-6965; U Museum 412). A follow up laboratory course (Anth 220 in
the spring semester) will also be available during which the artifacts and documentary sources
collected in the fall will be analyzed at the University Museum. Course may be repeated for credit.
220. (ANTH720) Archaeology Laboratory Field Project. (B) Humanities & Social Science Sector.
Class of 2010 & beyond. Schuyler.
Follow-up for Anthropology 219. Students may enroll in either or both courses, and in any sequence;
however, preference will be given to those previously enrolled in 219 that Fall. Class will meet in three
hour sections on Fridays and Saturdays and will involve the analysis of artifacts, documentary records,
oral historic sources and period illustrations collected on Southern New Jersey historic sites that Fall.
No previous archaeological or lab experience is required. (Rober t L. Schuyler :
schuyler@sas.upenn.edu; (215) 898-6965; UMuseum 412). Course may be repeated for credit.
223. (ANTH523) Indigenous Archaeology. (M) Staff.
This seminar is an introduction to Indigenous archaeologies. These approaches have been defined as
archaeology "with, for and by Indigenous peoples." However, they are in fact more than this. Not only
do they seek to make archaeology more representative of and responsible to Indigenous communities.
They also seek to contribute to a more accurate understanding of the archaeological record through
the incorporation of Native epistemologies. This course covers such topics as the history of American
archaeology, indigenous knowledge and cultural values, NAGPRA, museumification, decolonizing
methodologies, and current debates.
228. (EALC037) Chinese Culture and Society. (M) Kim.
This course investigates diverse aspects of Chinese culture and society in the past and the present.
Our discussion will begin by critically examining the alleged common characteristics of traditional
Chinese culture and society, such as patrilineal kinship and Confucian ethics. For the Maoist era, we
will discuss the impacts of the radical socialist movements, such as Great Leap Forward and Cultural
Revolution, on local communities, families, and individuals. Later we will analyze the increasingly
complex cultural and social landscapes of the Post-Mao China: How did the one-child policy contribute
to the rediscovery of childhood and the emerging consumer culture in China? Have the new job
opportunities created by the socialist market economy improved women's status? What are the effects
of multinational corporations on local communities? How can we explain the relation between the
creation of social stigma and infectious diseases such as AIDS?
230. (ANTH633, CRIM230) Forensic Anthropology. (M) Monge.
This course will investigate and discuss the various techniques of analysis that biological
anthropologists can apply to forensic cases. Topics include human osteology, the recovery of bodies,
the analysis of life history, the reconstruction of causes of death, and various case studies where
anthropologists have contributed significantly to solving forensic cases. Discussions will include the
limitations of forensic anthropology and the application of DNA recovery to skeletal/mummified
materials.

Page 9 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
236. (ANTH636, NELC241, NELC641, URBS236) Iraq: Ancient Cities & Empires. (M) Zettler.
This course surveys the cultural traditions of ancient Mesopotamia, the land between the Tigris and
Euphrates Rivers, a region commonly dubbed "cradle of civilization" or "heartland of cities," from an
archaeological perspective. It will investigate the emergence of sedentism and agriculture; early
villages and increasingly complex Neolithic and Chalcolithic cultures; the evolution of urban, literate
societies in the late 4th millennium; the city-states and incipient supra-regional polities of the third and
second millennium; the gradual emergence of the Assyrian and Babylonian "world empires," wellknown from historical books of the Bible, in the first millennium; and the cultural mix of Mesopotamia
under the successive domination of Greeks, Persians and Arabs. The course seeks to foster an
appreciation of the rich cultural heritage of ancient Mesopotamia, an understanding of cultural
continuities in the Middle East and a sense of the ancient Near Eastern underpinnings of western
civilization. No Prerequisite.
231. (CINE231) Anthropology and the Cinema. (M) Humanities & Social Science Sector. Class of
2010 & beyond. Krasniewicz.
This course analyzes mass-market American films using traditional anthropological theories about
symbolism, ritual, mythology, language, metaphor, narrative, and discourse. The goal is to think of the
movies as significant cultural artifacts that we use to make sense of the world rather than as just forms
of entertainment or art. Through a study of popular American films and their related merchandise and
cultural influences, we will also see how anthropology can be used to study contemporary cultures.
L/R 238. (HSOC238) Introduction to Medical Anthropology. (C) Humanities & Social Science
Sector. Class of 2010 & beyond. Barg.
Introduction to Medical Anthropology takes central concepts in anthropology -- culture, adaptation,
human variation, belief, political economy, the body -- and applies them to human health and illness.
Students explore key elements of healing systems including healing technologies and healer-patient
relationships. Modern day applications for medical anthropology are stressed.
244. Disease and Human Evolution. (M) Schurr.
This course will explore the role played by disease in human evolution, from the emergence of the
human lineage to the present day. We will evaluate both infectious and non-infectious diseases, and
examine the way in which populations and disease organisms have co-evolved. Related issues to be
explored include the nature of the virulence and pathogenicity of infectious agents, and the impact of
vaccination on pathogen evolution. In addition, we will discuss the epidemiological transition and the
rise of complex diseases of modernization (e.g., diabetes, cancer) that has occurred in the past
several centuries. Overall, the course will provide a broader understanding of the influence of disease
processes on the evolution of the human species.
SM 246. (ANTH649) Molecular Anthropology. (C) Schurr.Prerequisite(s): ANTH 003, Intro to Human
Evolution; some background in biology and genetics will also be useful.
In this course, we will explore the molecular revolution in biological anthropology, and, in particular,
examine the nature and theory of collecting molecular data to address anthropological questions
concerning human origins, evolution and biological variation. Some of the topics to be covered in this
course are the phylogenetic relationships among primates, kinship in apes and monkeys, the hominoid
trichotomy, modern human origins and migrations, Neandertal genetics, biogenetics of skin color,
disease adaptations, and the Human Genome Project.

Page 10 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
247. (ANTH747) Archaeology Laboratory Field Project-Summer. (L) Schuyler.
This course is a summer version of Anth 220 (see that course for full description). In summer more
emphasis will be placed on field visitations. Course open to all students; no instructor permission
needed. Course may be repeated for credit and students may take both anth 247 and 220. Questions:
contact Robert L Schuyler; schuyler@sas.upen.edu; (215) 898-6965; Univ Museum 412/6398.
248. Food and Feasting: Archaeology of the Table. (C) Moore.
Food satisfies human needs on many levels. Anth 248 explores the importance of food in human
experience, starting with the nutritional and ecological aspects of food choice and going on to focus on
the social and ritual significance of foods and feasts. Particular attention will be paid to the way that
archaeologists and biological anthropologists find out about food use in the past. Contemporary
observations about the central significance of eating as a social activity will be linked to the
development of cuisines, economies, and civilizations in ancient times. The course will use lectures,
discussions, films, food tastings, and fieldwork to explore the course themes. An optional community
service component will be outlined during the first week of class.
SM 249. Evolutionary Medicine. (C) Schurr.Prerequisite(s): ANTH 003 and ANTH 143 (or permission
for undergraduates).
Evolutionary medicine is the application if modern evolutionary theory to studies of health and disease
in humans. In taking this approach, the course will explore the roles played by disease in human
evolution, and investigate both the proximate and evolutionary explanations for them. We will examine
both infectious and non-infectious diseases, and assess the way in which populations and disease
organisms have co-evolved. Related issues to be examined are the nature of the virulence and
pathogenicity of infectious agents, and their efforts to subvert the immune system's responses to
infection. In addition, we will explore the evolved responses that enable individuals to protect, heal and
recuperate themselves from infections and injuries, such as fever and sickness behavior, and the
fitness enhancing aspects of these processes. Finally, we will investigate how past adaptations of early
humans to their environments now affects modern humans, who have very different diets, life
expectancy, activity patterns, and hygiene than their ancestors.
SM 260. (STSC268) Cultures of Science and Technology. (M) Petryna.
Science and technology figure centrally in the economic, political, and socio-cultural changes that
impact our worlds. Happenings in the life sciences, including the discovery of new genes, pathways,
and processes, are redrawing concepts of the body and human nature and refiguring social and
political relations. The seminar starts from the premise that scientific facts are made, not things
existing a priori in the world and that are merely picked up by researchers and consumed by lay
audiences. Likewise, technologies are created through a process of intense negotiation between
producers and their sophisticated users. Focusing on the biosciences, we explore the production of
science and technology and how they 1)affect individuals, self-identities, subjectivity, kinship, and
social relationships; 2)have interacted with or reinforced political programs, racial classifications,
unequal access to knowledge, and patterns of social injustice; 3)inform contemporary institutional
structures, strategies of governance, and practices of citizenship. We will combine methods and
perspectives from social and cultural anthropology, and the social studies of science and technology,
and will draw from historical case studies, contemporary ethnographies of science, scientific and
medical journals,
documentary films and media reports.

Page 11 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
SM 252. (URBS352) Food Habits in Philadelphia Communities: Exploring Eating and Changing
Food Habits in Philadelphia Middle Schools. (C) Kauer.
In this course, Penn undergraduates will explore and examine food habits, the intersection of culture,
family, history, and the various meanings of food and eating, by working with a middle-school class in
the Philadelphia public schools. The goal of the course will be to learn about the food habits of a
diverse local community, to explore that community's history of food and eating, and to consider ways
and means for understanding and changing food habits. Middle school students will learn about the
food environment and about why culture matters when we talk about food. Topics include traditional
and modern foodways, ethnic cuisine in America, food preferences, and 'American cuisine'. The
course integrates classroom work about food culture and anthropological practice with frequent trips to
middle schools where undergraduates will collaborate with students, their teachers, and a teacher
partner from the Agatson Urban Nutrition Initiative (UNI). Students will be required to attend one of two
time blocks each week to fulfill the service learning requirement- Mondays or Wednesdays 3-6pm for
the Spring 2015 semester.
Undergraduates will be responsible for weekly writing assignments responding to learning
experience in the course, for preparing materials to use with middle school children, for being
participant-learners with the middle school children and for a final research project. The material for
the course will address the ideas underlying university-community engagement, the relationships that
exist between food/eating and culture, and research methods.
SM 254. (LALS254) Archaeology of the Inca. (M) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Erickson.
The Inca created a vast and powerful South American empire in the high Andes Mountains that was
finally conquered by Spain. Using Penn's impressive museum collections and other archaeological,
linguistic, and historical sources, this course will examine Inca religion and worldview, architecture,
sacred temples, the capital of Cuzco, ritual calendar, ceque system, textiles, metalworking, economic
policies and expansionist politics from the dual perspectives of Inca rulers and their subjects. Our task
is to explain the rise, dominance, and fall of the Incas as a major South American civilization.
258. (CIS 106, LALS268) Visualizing the Past/Peopling the Present. (M) Badler/Erickson.
Most people's information about the Past is drawn from coffee table picture books, popular movies,
video games, documentaries about discoveries of "ancient, mysterious, and lost" civilizations, and
tours often led by guides of limited or even dubious credentials. How are these ideas presented,
formed, and circulated? Who creates and selects the information presented in this diverse media? Are
these presentations accurate? Do they promote or hurt scientific explanations? Can the artistic,
aesthetic, and scientific realms be bridged to effectively promote the past? This class will focus on
case studies and critiques of how archaeology and the past are created, presented and used in
movies, museums, games, the internet, and art.
In addition to exploring general concepts of archaeology and the media, students will work in teams
to produce an interactive, digital media exhibit using the latest modeling and augmented reality
programs for the new archaeological museum at the UNESCO World Heritage site of Tiwanaku,
Bolivia. Although nearly abandoned for a millennium and sacked by treasure hunters, the ruins are
considered one of the most important archaeological sites in South America and visited by 45,000
tourists a year. Potential class projects include fly-throughs of architectural renderings; simulations of
the design and engineering of the pyramids, temples, and palaces; modeling of human behavior within
architectural settings; and studying artifacts in the Penn Museum. The results will be displayed in the
Tiwanaku Museum and will serve to introduce visitors to the site.

Page 12 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
267. (ANTH567, CLST268, CLST568, NELC286, NELC586) Living World in Archaeological
Science. (M) Kassabaum, Monge, Moore.
By focusing on the scientific analysis of archaeological remains, this course will explore life and death
in the past. It takes place in the new Center for the Analysis of Archaeological Materials (CAAM) and is
team taught in three modules: human skeletal analysis, analysis of animal remains, and analysis of
plant remains. Each module will combine laboratory and classroom exercises to give students handson experience with archaeological materials. We will examine how organic materials provide key
information about past environments, human behavior, and cultural change through discussions of
topics such as health and disease, inequality, and food.
301. Senior Thesis. (B) Staff. Permit required
Individual research under faculty supervision culminating in a thesis.
SM 273. (HSOC239) Global Health: Anthropological Perspectives. (M) Petryna.
In some parts of the world spending on pharmaceuticals is astronomical. In others, people struggle for
survival amid new and reemerging epidemics and have little or no access to basic or life-saving
therapies. Treatments for infectious diseases that disproportionately affect the world's poor remain
under-researched and global health disparities are increasing. This interdisciplinary seminar integrates
perspectives from the social sciences and the biomedical sciences to explore 1) the development and
global flows of medical technologies; 2) how the health of individuals and groups is affected by medical
technologies, public policy, and the forces of globalization as each of these impacts local worlds. This
course is a Benjamin Franklin Seminar.
The seminar is structured to allow us to examine specific case material from around the world (Haiti,
South Africa, Brazil, Russia, China, India, for example), and to address the ways in which social,
political-economic, and technological factors -- which are increasingly global in nature -- influence
basic biological mechanisms and disease outcomes and distribution. As we analyze each case and
gain familiarity with ethnographic methods, we will ask how more effective interventions can be
formulated. The course draws from historical and ethnographic accounts, medical journals, ethical
analyses, and films, and familiarizes students with critical debates on globalization and with local
responses to globalizing processes.
SM 282. (CINE282, ENGL282, RELS208) Native American Literature. (M) Powell.
Spring 2014 Topic: This course will explore the dramatic changes that have occurred in the last century
in the way Native Americans have been represented in the medium of film. Beginning with silent films
like The Vanishing American and moving forward to contemporary films written, directed, and acted by
Native Americans, the class will progress from the study of stereotypical images of Hollywood films to
the current era of the Native American Renaissance, which has produced films like Smoke Signals,
Whale Rider, and The Fast Runner. Because the course is cross-listed in Religious Studies, English,
and Anthropology, we will focus on the power of film to convey dimensions of Native American cultures
that are more difficult to appreciate in written accounts. In other words, film is able to convey
dimensions of the oral tradition, material culture, and spiritual significance of the land much more
effectively because of the visual and audio components of the medium. The films will be situated in a
richly nuanced historical and cultural context in order to provide students with a fuller sense of the
Native cultures that are the subjects of the films studied during the semester.
SM 300. Senior Capstone Seminar. (A) Staff. Open to senior anthropology majors
ANTH 300 is a Capstone Seminar for anthropology majors in their senior year. It defines the Penn
anthropology major by bringing together and inter-relating major threads from the different subfields of
the Penn anthropology curriculum. Each session includes contributions from members of the standing
faculty and seminar discussions of a research theme in which anthropological knowledge is currently
progressing.

Page 13 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
SM 305. (ANTH609, URBS409) Anthropology & Policy: History, Theory, Practice. (B) Staff.
From the inception of the discipline, anthropologists have applied their ethnographic and theoretical
knowledge to policy issues concerning the alleviation of practical human problems. This approach has
not only benefited peoples in need but it has also enriched the discipline, providing anthropologists
with the opportunity to develop new theories and methodologies from a problem-centered approach.
The class will examine the connection between anthropology and policy, theory and practice (or
'praxis'), research and application. We will study these connections by reading about historical and
current projects. As an ABCS course, students will also volunteer in a volunteer organization of their
choice in the Philadelphia area, conduct anthropological research on the organization, and suggest
ways that the anthropological approach might support the efforts of the organization.
307. (ANTH607) Contemporary Native Americans. (M) Bruchac.
This course examines the social and political lives of contemporary Native American Indians in the
United States and Canada. Topics include: Indigenous identity; homelands and natural resources;
popular culture and media; Indigenous arts and cultural expression; museum representations;
athletics; gender relations; tribal recognition and sovereignty; and resistance movements. We will
consider the origins of federal programs and legislation that have become essential to the protection of
Native American freedoms. Students can expect to gain an appreciation of the complexity and cultural
diversity of Native communities and tribal nations and insights into their interactions with other cultures
over time.
SM 308. Ethnohistory of the Native Northeast. (C) Bruchac.
Ethnohistory is a multi-disciplinary form of ethnographic study and documentary research that
employs both anthropological and historical approaches. This course examines the foundations of the
ethnohistorical method as a means to interpret cross-cultural colonial interactions and conflicts, and to
better understand the complex histories of Native American Indian peoples from Pennsylvania and
northward and eastward. Students will develop skills and strategies for interpreting and contextualizing
primary and secondary source materials, oral traditions, colonial records, historical maps, and material
culture. Hands-on study will include visits to local archives and historical sites to view relevant
documents and landscapes.
SM 312. (HSOC321, URBS312) Health in Urban Communities. (A) Johnston.
This course will introduce students to anthropological approaches to health and to theories of
participatory action research. This combined theoretical perspective will then be put into practice using
West Philadelphia community schools as a case study. Students will become involved in the design
and implementation of health-related projects at an urban elementary or middle school. As one of the
course requirements, students will be expected to produce a detailed research proposal for future
implementation.
SM 309. (ANTH519) Psychoanalysis and Anthropology. (C) Urban.
This course will introduce students to the rich literature that has grown up around the encounter
between psychoanalysis and anthropology, from totem and taboo, to studies of the Oedipus complex,
child-rearing practices, ritual symbolism, mythology, and dreams. The class will also look to the future,
endeavoring to examine as well such issues as the role of computers (are they self objects?) and the
internet (including such online games as "Second Life"), dreams in space alien abduction narratives,
sexuality in advertising, political psychology, and other contemporary issues.

Page 14 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
SM 316. Anthropology of Global Labor. (M) Kim.
This course explores the theoretical and ethnographic approaches to the diverse forms of labor in the
world. Course discussions will begin by examining how the historical process of industrialization
created the modern concepts of time and the ideal industrial workers. Later we will investigate how
local communities and individuals react to the changes caused by rapidly globalizing capitalism. By
reading ethnographic writings about the various workplaces in capitalist and post-socialist countries,
students can understand how the existing "culture" of the people has affected their reactions to the
incessant changes. Course topics include both domestic and international cases. For domestic
workplaces, we will look into the daily lives of MBA job holders in Manhattan, part-time restaurant
workers in the Midwest, and Mexican migrant workers in the Deep South. For international workplaces,
we will investigate Japanese white-collar workers' reaction to the call of globalization, Colombian tin
miners' survival strategies to the fluctuating international market price of tin ore, Chinese workers'
understanding of their sweatshop jobs, Indian women workers' views about their jobs in a global call
center; origins of "corporate culture" and its local applications in South Korea.
SM 319. (CLST309) Pottery & Archaeology. (M) Boileau.Prerequisite(s): Any introduction to
archaeology course or permission of instructor.
Pottery is the most ubiquitous material recovered from most archaeological sites of the last 10,000
years; all archaeologists must be capable of working with it. This course presents the basics on the
recovery, documentation, and analysis of archaeological pottery. Instruction includes treatment of
pottery in the field, museum, and laboratory. Students will develop critical awareness of the potentials
and problems of interpreting pottery within the wider social contexts of production, exchange and
consumption. This course will foster an appreciation of the range and complexity of pottery studies and
encourage students to understand the materials and technological processes used in the manufacture
of pottery.
328. Performing Culture, Native American Arts. (C) Bruchac.
This course analyzes cultural performances as sites for the formation, expression, and transmission of
social identity. Students will read ethnographies, critiques, and reports of performance genres
including ritual, theater, music, dance, art, and spoken word, with a particular focus on Native
American and Indigenous arts and expressions. Topics include: expressive culture as survivance;
debates around authenticity and invented traditions; public identity and sexuality; political resistance;
the effects of globalization; transnationalism and hybridity; cultural appropriation; and the
transformation of folk performances in the wake of modern media.
SM 329. (ANTH529, PSYS329) Psychoanalytic and Anthropological Perspectives on Childhood.
(M) Lawrence Blum.
This course will consider the interaction between culture and individual psychology, and between
nature and nurture from birth to adulthood. Through through an examination of phases of human
development described by psychoanalysis, and evidence concerning psychoanalytic ideas from
around the world, we will consider questions such as: How do people become who they are, both
similar to others and uniquely individual? How do we develop emotionally? What features are and are
not universal for our species? What is and is not known about these questions. The instructors are
both psychoanalysts, one a psychiatrist, one a pediatrician.

Page 15 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
SM 334. (AFRC334, AFRC634, ANTH634, GSWS334, GSWS634) Feminist Ethnography.
Thomas.Prerequisite(s): Should have some fundamental knowledge of Cultural Anthropology.
This course will investigate the relationships among women, gender, sexuality, and anthropological
research. We will begin by exploring the trajectory of research interest in women and gender, drawing
first from the early work on gender and sex by anthropologists like Margaret Mead and Ruth Benedict;
moving through the 1970s and 1980s arguments about gender, culture, and political economy; arriving
at more current concerns with gender, race, sexuality, and empire. For the rest of the semester, we will
critically read contemporary ethnographies addressing pressing issues such as nationalism,
militarism, neoliberalism and fundamentalism. Throughout, we will investigate what it means not only
to "write women's worlds", but also to analyze broader socio-cultural, political, and economic
processes through a gendered lens. We will, finally, address the various ways feminist anthropology
fundamentally challenged the discipline's epistemological certainties, as well as how it continues to
transform our understanding of the foundations of the modern world.
404. Introduction to the Human Skeleton. (M) Monge.
An introduction to the anatomy and biology of the human skeleton. Laboratory work will be
supplemented by lectures and demonstrations on the development structure, function, and evolution of
the human skeleton.
341. (ANTH667) Psychology and Culture. (C) Urban.Prerequisite(s): ANTH 002.
The topic in the coming term is identity. "Identity," according to AFC Wallace, "may be considered any
image, or set of images (conscious or unconscious), which an individual has of himself or herself". The
full set of images of self refers to many aspects of the person on a number levels of generality: "his or
her" wishes and desires, strengths and capabilities, vulnerabilities and weaknesses, past experiences,
moral qualities, social status and roles, physical appearance, sexual orientation, ethnic, religious, or
group identification and much else. Our task in this course is to examine the ways people develop and
deploy their social and personal identity over the course of their lives under conditions of a culturally
constituted conception of self. Cross-cultural materials we will consider include films, autobiographical
writings, personal observations, and life history representations.
SM 347. Anthropology of Corporations. (C) Urban.
Modern business corporations can be characterized as having their own internal cultures, more or less
distinct from one another. They also exist within encompassing cultures and cultural flows. At the same
time, corporations are producers and disseminators, and thus have effects on their surrounding
environments, effects that extend from the local to the global. This course examines modern
corporations from these three perspectives through theoretical and ethnographic readings, guest
speakers from the corporate world, and independent research conducted by the students. Course
requirements include student presentations of their research and readings; one or more take-home
exams; and a final research paper.
SM 359. (HSOC359, URBS359) Nutritional Anthropology. (M) Rovner.
This course will explore the significance as it relates to food behaviors and nutritional status in
contemporary human populations. The topics covered will be examined from a biocultural perspective
and include 1) definiteion and functions of nutrients and how different cultures perceive nutrients, 2)
basic principles of human growth and development, 3) methods to assess dietary intake, 4) food
taboos, 5) feeding practices of infants and children, 6) food marketing, 7)causes and consequences of
under and overnutrition and 8) food insecurity and hunger

Page 16 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
407. Human Evolution. (M) Monge.Prerequisite(s): ANTH 003.
An examination of the fossil and other evidence documenting human evolution. Lectures and readings
are supplemented with slide and fossil reproduction materials.
415. Archaeology of Animals. (M) Moore.Prerequisite(s): ANTH 001 or permission from instructor.
This course introduces the study of animal bones from archaeological sites. Faunal analysis is an
interdisciplinary science which draws methods from archaeology, biology, and paleontology. Bones,
shells, and other remains yield evidence for the use of animals by humans, and evidence for the
biology of animals and for past environments. The course will focus on research approaches to
important transitions in human-animal relationships: the development of human hunting and fishing,
animal domestication, early pastoralism, and the emergence of market economies in animal products.
Class presentations will include lectures and discussion concerning research design and
archaeological case material, with additional videos, slidework with field and laboratory equipment,
and supervised work identifying and describing archaeological materials from the University Museum's
collections.
SM 420. Nations, Nationalism & Politics. (M) Kim.
This course explores historical and ethnographic approaches to the diverse forms of nations and
nationalism in the world. Course discussions will begin by examining how capitalism contributed to the
formation of a nationalist bourgeois class and how this "historical" class took a key role in creating the
concepts of nation, national territory and unified national market. We will investigate how people and
local communities reacted to the changes caused by these spreading ideas. By reading about the
various forms and ideas of nation and nationalism, students can understand how the unique
conditions of a specific locale have affected their formation, sometimes with destructive
consequences, examining cases both from "the West" and "the rest". In the case of the West we will
firstly look into the constructive role of bourgeois class during the French Revolution and how they
created the ideal form of a nation, which has clearly divided national territories, a national language
and a national education system, army, and most of all, a unified national market. Later we will discuss
how the image of the ideal nation has been transferred to other places and transformed according to
the specific local situations.
For these cases, we will analyze the fledgling democracy of the new colony of Great Britain (the
U.S.), the primordial nationalism of Japan and Korea (both North and South), the emerging patriotic
nationalism of China, the process of nation building in the Southeast Asian countries such as
Singapore, Malaysia and Indonesia, the militant/jingoistic nationalism of the post-socialist countries
such as Russia, and so on.
SM 429. Anthropology of the Environment. Petryna.
This seminar draws from social scientific and scientific literatures to explore current themes in the
anthropology of the environment. We will investigate the links between climate change science and
social science, and the ways in which anthropologists can contribute via in-depth fieldwork
methodology and long engagement in issues of society-environment interactions. We will also explore
how potential environmental, social, and biological impacts of global warming on the future are being
assessed through conceptual paradigms linked to risk, probability, scenario forecasting, tipping points,
planetary boundaries, and extinction.
454. Quantitative Analysis of Anthropological Data. (C) Dibble.
Problem-oriented approach to application of quantitative methods in anthropological research.
Emphasis on formulation of specific problems using real data sets by each student in his or her area of
interest. The logic of problem solving using quantitative arguments, the investigation of data reliability
and representativeness, and the use of statistical arguments in the presentation of results covered in
detail. Use of digital computers as research tools will be an integral part of the presentation.

Page 17 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
433. (LALS433) Andean Archaeology. (M) Erickson.
Consideration of the culture history of the native peoples of the Andean area, with emphasis on the
pre-conquest archaeology of the Central-Andean region.
SM 441. (HSOC441) Cross Cultural Approaches to Health and Illness. (M) Barg.
This course will explore the ways that health and illness-related beliefs and behaviors develop within
communities. We will identify the forces that shape these beliefs and behaviors and ultimately affect
who gets sick, who gets well, and the very nature of the illness experience. Emphasis will be given to
the relationships among sociocultural, political and biological factors and the ways that these factors
interact to produce the variation that we see in health and illness related attitudes, behaviors and
outcomes across cultures.
SM 451. (ANTH751) Historical Archaeology. (M) Schuyler.
Archaeology of the Modern World from the Columbian voyage (1492) to the 20th century. Topics such
as the rise of early modern Europe, European exploration and colonization, African American
Archaeology, Asian American Archaeology, the rise of colonial society, contact with native peoples, the
Industrial Revolution, and the archaeology of the 20th century will be covered.
102. (CINE112, COML245, ENGL102, GSWS102) STUDY OF A THEME.
SM 369. (ENGL369, GSWS369) TOPICS POETRY & POETICS.

Graduate Courses
SM 511. (HIST512) Ethics, Archaeology Cultural Heritage. (M) Leventhal.
This seminar will explore some of the most important issues that are now a central part of
archaeological, anthropological and historical research throughout the world. The identification and
control of cultural heritage is a central part of the framework for research within other communities.
Issues for this course will also include cultural identity, human rights, repatriation, colonialism, working
with communities and many other topics. Field research today must be based upon a new series of
ethical standards that will be discussed and examined within this class. Major topics include: cultural
heritage - definitions and constructs, cosmopolitanism and collecting, archaeology and looting, cultural
heritage preservation, museums - universal and national, museum acquisition policies, cultural identity,
international conventions (including underwater issues), national laws of ownership, community based
development, cultural tourism, development models, and human rights.
SM 512. Experimental Lithic Technology. (M) Dibble.
Stone tools are the most significant source of information about past human behavior and evolution
over the past 2.5 million years. But because stone technology has been largely abandoned,
archaeologists often rely on experiments to help them determine how such tools were made and used.
This course will review the kinds of experiments most often used (both actualistic and replicative), but
will focus on understanding the mechanics of stone flaking through controlled experiments. As part of
their study, students will take part in both designing and implementing a series of experiments
involving mechanical flaking of molded glass cores, and will apply the results of this research to
archaeological specimens.

Page 18 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
SM 516. (AFST516, GSWS516, URBS516) Public Interest Workshop. (M) Suess.
This is a Public Interest Ethnography workshop (originally created by Peggy Reeves Sanday Department of Anthropology) that incorporates an interdisciplinary approach to exploring social issues.
Open to graduate and advanced undergraduate students, the workshop is a response to Amy
Gutmann's call for interdisciplinary cooperation across the University and to the Department of
Anthropology's commitment to developing public interest research and practice as a disciplinary
theme. Rooted in the rubric of public interest social science, the course focuses on: 1) merging
problem solving with theory and analysis in the interest of change motivated by a commitment to
social justice, racial harmony, equality, and human rights; and 2) engaging in public debate on human
issues to make research results accessible to a broader audience. The workshop brings in guest
speakers and will incorporate original ethnographic research to merge theory with action. Students are
encouraged to apply the framing model to a public interest research and action topic of their choice.
This is an academically-based-community-service (ABCS) course that partners directly with Penn's
Netter Center for Community Partnerships.
SM 519. (ANTH309) Psychoanalysis & Anthropology. (C) Urban.
This course will introduce students to the rich literature that has grown up around the encounter
between psychoanalysis and anthropology, from totem and taboo, to studies of the Oedipus complex,
child-rearing practices, ritual symbolism, mythology, and dreams. The class will also look to the future,
endeavoring to examine as well such issues as the role of computers (are they self objects?) and the
internet (including such online games as "Second Life"), dreams in space alien abduction narratives,
sexuality in advertising, political psychology, and other contemporary issues.
547. (EDUC547, FOLK527, URBS547) Anthropology & Education. (C) Hall.
An introduction to the intent, approach, and contribution of anthropology to the study of socialization
and schooling in cross-cultural perspective. Education is examined in traditional, colonial, and complex
industrial societies.
525. (PUBH526) Anthropology and Public Health. (M) Barg.Prerequisite(s): PUBH 502.
In this course, we examine three types of relationships between anthropology and public health.
Anthropology and public health will examine complementary and competing concepts fundamental to
each discipline and ways that these concepts make it essential and difficult for the disciplines to work
together. Anthropology on public health takes a critical look at assumptions in public health praxis.
Anthropology in Public Health will focus on ways that anthropological theory and methods inform the
practice of public health. Using these three approaches, we will examine topics in public health such
as mental health, health promotion/disease prevention communication, cancer disparities,
reproductive health, violence and infectious disease. Students will learn and apply anthropologic
research methods to these problems.
SM 529. (ANTH329, PSYS329) Psychoanalytic and Anthropological Perspectives on Childhood.
(M) Lawrence Blum.
This course will consider the interaction between culture and individual psychology, and between
nature and nurture from birth to adulthood. Through through an examination of phases of human
development described by psychoanalysis, and evidence concerning psychoanalytic ideas from
around the world, we will consider questions such as: How do people become who they are, both
similar to others and uniquely individual? How do we develop emotionally? What features are and are
not universal for our species? What is and is not known about these questions. The instructors are
both psychoanalysts, one a psychiatrist, one a pediatrician.

Page 19 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
SM 542. (COMM542, EDUC545) Part I-Documentary, Ethnography, and Research:
Communicating Scholarship through Film/Video. Jackson.
Students will learn how to write, shoot, edit, and upload documentary films over the length of this twopart course. In the first part, students complete a program of hands-on formal training in filmcraft while
they simultaneously identify a research subject that they will propose to depict in a documentary film.
In the second part of the course students will produce the faculty-approved documentary themselves.
The film's final cut must be screened by the end of the second semester. Students should expect to
work on their projects outside class time. The school will provide basic filmmaking equipment- video
cameras and computers for editing in labs. Students are responsible for all storage (computer drives),
tapes, dvds, and project related costs.
SM 556. (AAMW556) Practicum in Archaeological Field Methods and Problems. (M)
Dibble.Prerequisite(s): ANTH 241 or 600 and one archaeology area course or permission of instructor.
Seminar analyzing process of archaeological excavation as a problem of research design and method,
stressing excavation as an integrated methodological system of research dealing with data retrieval,
storage processing, integration and interpretation leading to final publication. Course intended for
students proposing archaeological careers; it will be assumed participants have some practical
excavation experience.
SM 557. (AAMW557, LALS557) Seminar in Archaeological Theory and Method: Archaeology of
Landscapes. (M) Erickson.Prerequisite(s): ANTH 241 or 600 and one archaeology area course or
permission of instructor.
Advanced seminar for potential professional archaeologists. Course will examine critically main past
and present theoretical issues in archaeological research and interpretation, and consider various
methodologies utilized towards these interpretive ends.
561. (VCSN657) Global Food Security. (M) Spooner.
This is an interdisciplinary course on the problems of food demand and consumption, production and
supply in our increasingly globalized and urbanizing world. Special attention will be given to the
intersections of current technologies of food production, current nutritional problems, environmental
change and resource degradation, and the changing quality of human social life under globalization.
Where and how will sufficient nutritious food be produced sustainably and how can the politics and
economics of equitable distribution in such large urban populations be achieved?
567. (ANTH267, CLST268, CLST568, NELC286, NELC586) Living World in Archaeological
Science. (M) Kassabaum, Monge, Moore.
By focusing on the scientific analysis of archaeological remains, this course will explore life and death
in the past. It takes place in the new Center for the Analysis of Archaeological Materials (CAAM) and is
team taught in three modules: human skeletal analysis, analysis of animal remains, and analysis of
plant remains. Each module will combine laboratory and classroom exercises to give students handson experience with archaeological materials. We will examine how organic materials provide key
information about past environments, human behavior, and cultural change through discussions of
topics such as health and disease, inequality, and food.

Page 20 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
SM 586. Desire and Demand. (M) Diggs-Thompson. See course description for ANTH 086.
Does consumption shape culture or does culture shape consumption? As even the most mundane
purchase becomes socially symbolic and culturally meaningful we can persuasively argue that the
concept of "need" has been transformed. Analyzing a variety of physical and virtual consumer venues,
the goal of this seminar is to understand and to analyze historical and contemporary issues related to
a culture of consumption. We investigate social and political-economic factors that impact when and
how people purchase goods and argue that behavior attached to consumption includes a nexus of
influences that may change periodically in response to external factors. Readings and research
assignments are interdisciplinary and require a critical analyses of global/local linkages. The city of
Philadelphia becomes the seminar's laboratory as we ask how have issues of culture, consumption,
and global capitalism become intertwined around the world?
SM 603. Language in Culture and Society. (C) Agha. First-year anthropology graduate students.
First-year anthropology graduate students or Instructor Permission. Examination of properties of
human language which enable social persons to interpret the cultural world and to act within it. Topics
include: principles of lexical and grammatical organization; the role of language structure (grammar)
and linguistic context (indexicality) in discursive activity; referential uses of language; social interaction;
markers of social role, identity, and group-belonging; criteria by which models of linguistic form and
function are formulated; the empirical limits within which different models have explanatory value.
SM 587. (AFRC587, LALS588) Race, Nation, Empire. (B) Thomas.
This graduate seminar examines the dynamic relationships among empires, nations and states;
colonial and post-colonial policies; and anti-colonial strategies within a changing global context. Using
the rubrics of anthropology, history, cultural studies, and social theory, we will explore the intimacies of
subject formation within imperial contexts- past and present- especially in relation to ideas about race
and belonging. We will focus on how belonging and participation have been defined in particular
locales, as well as how these notions have been socialized through a variety of institutional contexts.
Finally, we will consider the relationships between popular culture and state formation, examining
these as dialectical struggles for hegemony.
SM 600. Contemporary Archaeology in Theory. (C) Staff. First-year anthropology graduate students.
This graduate seminar addresses contemporary anthropological archaeology and considers the varied
ways inferences are made about past and present human behavior from the archaeological record. It
reviews such fundamental topics as the use of analogy, Middle Range theory, symbolism and
meaning, social and cultural evolution, ideology and power, feminism and gender, and indigenous
(non-Western) perspectives. It also foregrounds basic issues regarding heritage, looting, and ethics.
SM 602. Human Evolutionary Anthropology. (C) Schurr. First-year anthropology graduate students.
First-year anthropology graduate students. This course is an introduction to the study of human
evolution through a survey of evidence from the various subfields of evolutionary anthropology. Special
attention will be paid to current issues and problems in these subfields, and the different ways in which
researchers are attempting to understand and uncover the details of human evolution. Among the
areas of inquiry to be covered in this course are paleoanthropology, primatology, human biology,
molecular anthropology, and evolutionary biology. Some specific issues to be explored will include the
primate roots of human behavior, brain and language evolution, new fossil hominids, the origins of
anatomically modern humans, and human biogenetic variation.

Page 21 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
SM 605. (COML605, FOLK605, MUSC605) Anthropology of Music. (C) Staff.
Theories and methods of the ethnomusicological approach to the study of music in culture, applied to
selected western and non-western performance contexts.
607. (ANTH307) Contemporary Native Americans. (M) Bruchac.
This course examines the social and political lives of contemporary Native American Indians in the
United States and Canada. Topics include: Indigenous identity; homelands and natural resources;
popular culture and media; Indigenous arts and cultural expression; museum representations;
athletics; gender relations; tribal recognition and sovereignty; and resistance movements. We will
consider the origins of federal programs and legislation that have become essential to the protection of
Native American freedoms. Students can expect to gain an appreciation of the complexity and cultural
diversity of Native communities and tribal nations and insights into their interactions with other cultures
over time.
SM 617. Contemporary Approaches to the Study of Culture and Society. (C) Petryna/Thomas.
First-year anthropology graduate students.
A critical examination of recent history and theory in cultural and social anthropology. Topics include
structural-functionalism; symbolic anthropology; post-modern theory. Emphasis is on major schools
and trends in America, Britain, and France.
SM 618. Mediatized Culture in Contemporary Society. (M) Agha.Prerequisite(s): ANTH 603 or
permission from Instructor.
The course examines the role of mass media in organizing and disseminating cultural norms and
values in contemporary society. Particular attention is given to two domains of organized social life,
namely consumer behavior and public opinion. The course explores the ways in which mass media
organize aspects of individual preference and taste, matters of identity and lifestyle, and the sense of
belonging to a common culture. Issues of how individuals come to acquire common tastes and
opinions, and attempt to vary upon them in defining their positional identities and stakes are central
areas of concern. Material from a variety of present-day societies is discussed in comparative terms.
620. Directed Reading and Research. (C) Staff. May be repeated for credit
To be arranged only by consultation with academic adviser and faculty member(s) to be involves; a
proposed syllabus must be presented for approval, and written papers will be required without
exception. On approval of these papers one copy must be presented to the Department of
Anthropology office for filing.
621. Directed Field Training and Research. (C) Staff. May be repeated for credit
To be arranged only by consultation with academic adviser and the faculty member(s) to be involved; a
proposed syllabus must be presented for approval and written papers will be required without
exception. On approval of these papers, one copy must be presented to the Department of
Anthropology office for filing.

Page 22 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
SM 630. (ANTH103) Ceramics and Ceramic Analysis. (M) Zettler.
Introduction to ceramics, ceramic typology and analysis. Course will utilize largely work done on
ancient Near Eastern ceramics, though it is not intended as an introduction to ancient Near Eastern
ceramic sequences. Course is intended as a practical introduction for archaeologists to ceramics, the
ways ceramics are collected and dealt with in the field, ceramic typology and "laboratory analyses". To
provide depth, the course will cover both the ways ceramics have been dealt with in the past and
current trends in the study of ceramics.
SM 622. Topics in Physical Anthropology. (M) Staff.
Humans are characterized by several distinctive life history features, e.g. large babies, late age at
puberty and first reproduction, cessation of menstruation long before death, and a long life span. In
addition, our reproductive decisions are heavily influenced by society and culture. This seminar will
explore human life history from an evolutionary ecology and biocultural perspective, and will analyze
the possible contributions of this approach to other disciplines such as demography, sociology,
medicine, and public health. We will read and discuss seminal papers and recent developments on the
topic.
SM 626. Medical Anthropology: Case Studies and Methods. (M) Petryna.Prerequisite(s):
Permission of instructor.
Intensive analysis of the application of anthropological theory and methodology to problems of human
health and health care. Offered for students in the Medical Anthropology Program. Other qualified
students may enroll with the permission of instructor.
SM 628. Language in Culture and Society: Special Topics. (M) Agha.Prerequisite(s): ANTH 603 or
Instructor Permission.
The course is devoted to a single research topic of contemporary interest in linguistic anthropology.
Topics vary from year to year. Readings locate current debates in relation to longstanding assumptions
in the literature and new directions in contemporary research.
SM 631. Grammatical Categories. (M) Agha.Prerequisite(s): ANTH 603 or Instructor Permission.
The course is an introduction to grammatical organization in human language for students in linguistic
anthropology and associated fields. Primary foci: methods for the analysis of grammatical categories;
constituency and propositional content; grammatical typology and universals. Other topics: relationship
of grammatical categories to other principles organizing communication, conceptualization and
interpersonal conduct; analysis of interlocking category systems; relationship of categories to actual
human behavior. Students are encouraged to apply the techniques developed in lectures and assigned
readings to the analysis of a non-Indo-European language over the course of the semester.
633. (ANTH230, CRIM230) Forensic Anthropology. (M) Monge.
This course will investigate and discuss the various techniques of analysis that biological
anthropologists can apply to forensic cases. Topics include human osteology, the recovery of bodies,
the analysis of life history, the reconstruction of causes of death, and various case studies where
anthropologists have contributed significantly to solving forensic cases. Discussions will include the
limitations of forensic anthropology and the application of DNA recovery to skeletal/mummified
materials.

Page 23 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
SM 634. (ANTH334, GSWS334, GSWS634) Feminist Ethnography. (M) Thomas.
This course will investigate the relationships among women, gender, sexuality, and anthropological
research. We will begin by exploring the trajectory of research interest in women and gender, drawing
first from the early work on gender and sex by anthropologists like Margaret Mead and Ruth Benedict;
moving through the 1970s and 1980s arguments about gender, culture, and political economy; arriving
at more current concerns with gender, race, sexuality, and empire. For the rest of the semester, we will
critically read contemporary ethnographies addressing pressing issues such as nationalism,
militarism, neoliberalism and fundamentalism. Throughout, we will investigate what it means not only
to "write women's worlds", but also to analyze broader socio-cultural, political, and economic
processes through a gendered lens. We will, finally, address the various ways feminist anthropology
fundamentally challenged the discipline's epistemological certainties, as well as how it continues to
transform our understanding of the foundations of the modern world.
636. (ANTH236, NELC241) Mesopotamia: Heartland of Cities and Empires. (M) Zettler.
This course surveys the cultural traditions of ancient Mesopotamia, the land between the Tigris and
Euphrates Rivers, a region commonly dubbed "cradle of civilization" or "heartland of cities," from an
archaeological perspective. It will investigate the emergence of sedentism and agriculture; early
villages and increasingly complex Neolithic and Chalcolithic cultures; the evolution of urban, literate
societies in the late 4th millennium; the city-states and incipient supra-regional polities of the third and
second millennium; the gradual emergence of the Assyrian and Babylonian "world empires," wellknown from historical books of the Bible, in the first millennium; and the cultural mix of Mesopotamia
under the successive domination of Greeks, Persians and Arabs. The course seeks to foster an
appreciation of the rich cultural heritage of ancient Mesopotamia, an understanding of cultural
continuities in the Middle East and a sense of the ancient Near Eastern underpinnings of western
civilization.
654. (ANTH100, NELC281, NELC681, SAST161) Topics In Anthropology and the Modern World.
(A) Spooner.
This course relates anthropological models and methods to current problems in the Modern World.
The overall objective is to show how the research findings and analytical concepts of anthropology
may be used to illuminate and explain events as they have unfolded in the recent news and in the
course of the semester. Each edition of the course will focus on a particular country or region that has
been in the news.
SM 640. (AFRC640, COMM740) Race, Diaspora & Critique. (M) Thomas.
This course will attempt to engage students in an interdisciplinary conversation about the
epistemological, methodological, and political interventions framing/grounding/informing Africana
Studies as a scholarly endeavor. Students will be asked to consider the context and content of this
evolving field/discipline, examining the ideological and intellectual issues that drive debates within (and
critiques of) African-American/Africana Studies (indeed, the very difference in such designations
bespeaks important demographic and ideological shifts within the academy and beyond). Students will
be introduced to some of the major historical and contemporary literatures in Africana Studies across
the humanities and social sciences, emphasizing "diaspora" as a guiding construct and organizing
principle. Class discussions will be aimed at expanding students' knowledge of the sources available
for research in Africana Studies - with an eye toward guiding their preparation for future scholarly
research informed by the questions and critical conceptualizations emerging from Africana Studies.

Page 24 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
SM 643. Globalization And Its Historical Significance. (M) Spooner.
Globalization is one of the most comprehensive topics of our time, and also one of the most
controversial. This course assesses the current state of globalization, considering it in terms of
economic, political, and cultural change, and follows its progress through the semester. The class will
be led through the main topics and debates, introduced to conceptual and empirical tools for framing
academic discussion and research about its dynamics, how and when it began, and (most particularly)
how it differs from earlier episodes of historical change. Students will monitor the course of
globalization in the course of the semester, take an exam on the readings and lectures, and develop
their own research project on a related issue of their choice.
SM 649. (ANTH246) Molecular Anthropology. (C) Schurr.
This course explores the molecular revolution in biological anthropology, and in particular, examines
the nature and theory of collecting molecular data to address anthropological questions concerning
human origins, evolution and biological variation. Students will review the methods used to analyze
molecular genetic data, and learn to draw evolutionary and phylogenetic conclusions from this
information.
SM 655. Methods and Grantwriting for Anthropological Research. (M) Thomas.
This course is designed for third- and fourth-year graduate students in anthropology who are working
on their dissertation research proposals and submitting grants. Graduate students from other
departments who will be submitting grant proposals that include an ethnographic component are also
welcome. Students will develop their proposals throughout the course of the semester, and will meet
important fall submission deadlines. They will begin by working with various databases to search
funding sources relevant to the research they plan to conduct. In class sessions, they will also work
with the professor and their peers to refine their research questions, their methods, the relationship of
any previous research to their dissertation fieldwork, and the broader theoretical and "real-world"
significance of their proposed projects. Finally, students will also have the opportunity to have live
"chats" with representatives from funding agencies, thereby gaining a better sense of what particular
foundations are looking for in a proposal.
SM 658. Discourse Analysis. (C) Agha.Prerequisite(s): ANTH 603.
Examination of current theories and methods in the study of discourse, including verbal and nonverbal communication. Each student conducts an ethnographic or historical study of a discursive
practice, culminating in a class presentation and term paper. The first half of the course focuses on the
study of discursive interaction in small scale face to face encounters between individuals, including
methods of data collection, transcription, and analysis. The second half takes up public discourses
which involve many social actors, are linked to widespread social practices, and result in the
coordination of large-scale patterns of action, belief, and value in society.
662. Social Reorganization: Tribes, Communities & Corporations. (M) Spooner.
A wide variety of ethnographic and sociological examples of formal and informal organization will be
described and analyzed within the framework of the emerging modern awareness of the possibility of
organizing and reorganizing society and social groups for specific short- and long-term objectives.

Page 25 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
667. (ANTH341) Topics In Psychology & Culture. (C) Urban.
Our task in this course is to examine some of the ways in which people develop and deploy their
identities under the conditions of a rapidly changing world. This task is part of a life-long process, or
journey, which begins in one's family of origin and is shaped by the cultural life plan while growing up.
Features of the life plan involve creative reflection, taking risks, learning from errors and failures,
assessing one's feelings, revising one's operating knowledge, altering one's goals and taking the next
steps forward. Life stories then become the repository of one's steps along the way, sometimes
challenged by experiences in extreme situations and at other times facilitated by the rituals of our lives.
Fulfillment becomes a product of the process of appraisal and of the means of coping with the
exigencies of life, including its culmination and ending.
SM 701. (AFRC701, AFST701, HIST701) African Studies Seminar. (M) Staff.
Interdisciplinary seminar for discussion of issues of special interest to graduate students and faculty in
African Studies. Topics vary according to the interests and expertise of instructors.
SM 695. Current Topics in Molecular Anthropology. (M) Schurr.
An examination of the nature and theory of collecting molecular data to address biological
anthropological questions concerning human origins, evolution and biological variation. Students will
review the methods used to analyze molecular genetic data, and learn to draw evolutionary and
phylogenetic conclusions from information.
704. (EDUC706, FOLK706, URBS706) Culture/Power/Identities. (A) Hall.
The seminar provides a forum for critically examining the interrelationships between culture, power,
and identities, or forms of difference and relations of inequality. The central aim is to provide students
with an introduction to classic and more recent social theories concerning the bases of social
inequality and relations shaped by race, class, ethnic, national and gender differences. Theories
discussed in the course provide analytic tools for examining the role of social institutions such as
education for mediating social hierarchy and difference. The class will have a seminar format
emphasizing close analysis and discussion of the required readings in relation to a set of overarching
questions concerning the nature of power, forms of social inequality and the politics of identity and
difference.
SM 705. (AFRC705, AFST705, FOLK715, GSWS705, MUSC705) Seminar in Ethnomusicology. (M)
Staff. Open to graduate students in all departments.
Seminar on selected topics in ethnomusicology.
707. (EDUC700) Advanced Ethnographic Design. (B) Hall.
This course is designed to follow after Introduction to Qualitative and Ethnographic Methods (EDUC
672). In the introductory course, students learned how to use qualitative methods in conducting a brief
field study. This advanced level course focuses on research design and specifically the craft of
ethnographic research. Students will apply what they learn in the course in writing a proposal for a
dissertation research project.
SM 709. Current Research in Paleoanthropology. (C) Dibble.
An intensive review of the major topics relating to Pleistocene human evolution, focusing on the
integration of data from both biology and archeology.

Page 26 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
SM 710. Readings and Research in Social Organization. (M) Spooner.
Study and analysis of selected problems in social organization.
SM 715. Globalization Seminar. (M) Spooner.
Weekly seminar discussions will focus on current news and opinion about social and cultural change
that may be interpreted as globalization in different parts of the world. The overall objective is to
develop methodological and theoretical approaches to the study of globalization. Students taking the
course for credit will be required to write a research paper.
SM 717. Cultural Motion Seminar. (C) Urban.
This is a graduate seminar/workshop for students pursuing research in anthropology at any phase from preliminary readings, to proposal writing, to dissertation write-up - that deals in some way with
cultural motion. Students will be expected to present their own work, and to discuss the work of others,
throughout the course of the seminar. The course is appropriate for first or second year graduate
students in Anthropology seeking to define a research area or already pursuing research. It is also
appropriate for third and fourth year students in the proposal-writing phase. And, finally, the seminar
will provide a forum for dissertation-writing students interested in receiving preliminary feedback on
their work from peers.
SM 719. (ANTH219) Archaeology Field Project. (A) Schuyler. Permission of instructor required.
This is a parallel course to Anthropology 219, but on the graduate level. It will only be open to select
graduate students (i.e. historical archaeology students and some CGS MA students). Specific
permission of the instructor is required in each case.
720. (ANTH220) Archaeology Laboratory Field Project. (B) Schuyler.
Follow-up for Anthropology 719 and parallel course to Anthropology 220. Class will meet in three hour
sections on Fridays and Saturdays and will involve the analysis of artifacts, documentary records, oral
historic sources and period illustrations collected on Southern New Jersey historic sites that Fall. No
previous archaeological or lab experience is required. (Robert L. Schuyler: schuyler@sas.upenn.edu;
(215) 898-6965; UMuseum 412). Course may be repeated for credit.
SM 723. (AAMW723, ARTH723) Topics in the Art of the Ancient Near East. (M) Pittman.
Topic Varies.
SM 727. Archaeology of Latin America Seminar. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): ANTH 468 or ANTH 600.
Advanced seminar for students wishing to pursue study of field data, method, & theoretical problems
in the archaeology of Latin America.
SM 730. Readings & Research In Linguistic Anthropology. (D) Agha.Prerequisite(s): ANTH 603
OR INSTRUCTORS PERMISSION.
The course is designed for students and faculty interested in discussing current research and/or
research topics in any area of linguistic or semiotic anthropology. The primary intent of the course is to
familiarize students with the literature on selected research topics and to develop their own research
agendas in the light of the literature. Students may enroll on an S/U basis for 0.5 CU per semester. The
course may be repeated for credit up to 4 times.

Page 27 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
747. (ANTH247) Archaeology Laboratory Field Project-Summer. (L) Schuyler.
This course is a summer version of Anth 720 (see that course for full description). In summer more
emphasis will be placed on field visitations. Course open to all graduate students; no instructor
permission needed. Course may be repeated for credit and students may take both anth 747 and 720.
Questions: contact Robert L Schuyler; schuyler@sas.upen.edu; (215) 898-6965; Univ Museum
412/6398.
SM 750. (ANTH450) African American Archaeology. (M) Schuyler.
This course will cover the new and productive field of the archaeology of African Americans from the
17th to the 20th centuries. The focus will be on continental North America but some attention will also
be given to West Africa (AD 1500 - present) and the West Indies. No background (or previous courses)
in archaeology or anthropology is required.
SM 751. (ANTH451) Historical Archaeology. (M) Schuyler. May be repeated for credit.
General background reading and tutorial preparation in the archaeology of the modern world (A.D.
1400- 20th Century).
SM 752. (ANTH151) Perspectives on the Evolution of Human Behavior. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s):
ANTH 602 or Instructor permission.
This seminar will consider the evolution of cognitive skills from a variety of perspectives. One focus will
be on hominid anatomical evolution, particularly those aspects relevant to the evolution of human
behavior (e.g., neuroanatomy). Another focus will be on non-human primate behavior. We will also
consider the archaeological evidence left by Pleistocene humans that may be relevant to this question.
The goal of the seminar will be to integrate research from many fields of inquiry in order to gain a
better understanding of the human condition.
SM 756. Social Anthropology Seminar. (G) Spooner.
Weekly seminar discussions will be devoted to the analysis and evaluation of the social anthropology
thread or threads in the history of anthropology, and their relevance to the positions and interests of
cultural anthropology today. Students taking the course for credit will be required to write a research
paper.
SM 757. (ANTH457) Themes In Historical Archaeology. (A) Schuyler.
Course will examine research by historical archaeologists on the basic attributes of humanity.
Elements that are more biologically grounded (age, gender, race) and elements more purely cultural
(ethnicity, class, occupation, nationality, religion) will both be surveyed. Recent field findings and
theoretical debates will be covered.

Page 28 of 29

ANTHROPOLOGY
(AS) {ANTH}
SM 842. (CINE842, COMM842) The Filmic. (M) Jackson.
This interdisciplinary graduate course takes "film" as its object of study, theorizing it as a medium/
mode of representation. We draw on film theory, psychoanalysis, literary analysis, cognitive theory,
communication studies, and visual anthropology to discuss several key issues related to the state of
film/filmmaking in an age of "digital" media. We interrogate contentious notions of authority, reflexivity,
and objectivity. We analyze film's claim to "realistic" (iconic and indexical) representation. We
interrogate how "film" and "video" get imagined in all their visual particularity, sometimes conflated into
a single visual form and at other moments distinguished as a function of the difference between
photochemical and electro-magnetic processes. We also highlight the kinds of techniques filmmakers
use to thematize these same issues "on screen." Students will be responsible for watching one film
each week (along with the course readings), and part of the final project involves helping to produce a
group documentary/ethnographic "film" that engages the course's central concerns.

Page 29 of 29

