ASIAN AMERICAN STUDIES
(AS) {ASAM}
L/R 001. (SOCI103) Asian Americans in Contemporary Society. (C) Society Sector. All classes.
Kao.
This class will introduce you to sociological research of Asian Americans and engage in the "model
minority" stereotype. We begin by a brief introduction to U.S. immigration history and sociological
theories about assimilation and racial stratification. The class will also cover research on racial and
ethnic identity, educational stratification, mass media images, interracial marriage, multiracials,
transracial adoption, and the viability of an Asian American panethnic identity. We will also examine
the similarities and differences of Asian Americans relative to other minority groups.
002. (ENGL072) Asian American Literature. (C) Arts & Letters Sector. All Classes. Staff.
An overview of Asian American literature from its beginnings at the turn of the twentieth century to the
present. This course covers a wide range of Asian American novels, plays, and poems, situating them
in the contexts of Asian American history and minority communities and considering the variety of
formal strategies these different texts take.
003. (HIST155) Introduction to Asian American History. (C) History & Tradition Sector. All classes.
Azuma.
This course provides an introduction to the history of Asian/Pacific Americans, focusing on the wide
diversity of migrant experiences, as well as the continuing legacies of Orientalism on American-born
APA's. Issues of race, class, gender, and sexuality will also be examined.
L/R 006. (AFRC006, SOCI006, URBS214) Race and Ethnic Relations. (C) Staff.
This course is cross-listed with SOCI 006 when the subject matter is related to Asian Americans.
SM 013. (HIST104) Freshman Seminar: Asian American History. (C) Azuma.
This reading seminar will focus on how different groups of Asians interacted with each other in the
context of early twentieth-century American society, especially in Hawaii and California. Such issues
as ethnicity, complexity of race relations (as opposed to conventional black-white binarism), and the
intricate entanglements of class and race will also be examined. Topics can change each semester.
Please see our website for more current information: asam.sas.upenn.edu
SM 110. Asian American Activism. (C) Staff.
Please see our website for more current information: asam.sas.upenn.edu
160. (SAST290) South Asians in the United States. (A) Khan.
This course investigates the everyday practices and customs of South Asians in America. Every
immigrant group has its own history, customs, beliefs and values, making each unique while
simultaneously a part of the "melting pot" or salad bowl" of American society. Yet how do people
define themselves and their ethnicities living in a diasporic context? By taking into account the
burgeoning South Asian American population as our model, this course will explore the basic themes
surrounding the lives that immigrants are living in America, and more specifically the identity which
the second generation, born and/or raised in American, is developing. South Asians in the U.S. will be
divided thematically covering the topics of ethnicity, marriage, gender, religion, and pop culture.
Reading and assignments will discuss a variety of issues and viewpoints that are a part of the fabric
of South Asia, but will focus on the interpretation of such expressive culture in the United States.

Page 1 of 3

ASIAN AMERICAN STUDIES
(AS) {ASAM}
SM 170. (SAST170) Asian American Psychology. (B) Staff.
Using a cultural perspective, this course is intended to provide knowledge of Asian American
personality, identity, and its relationship to mental well being; analyze psycho-social research
pertinent to Asian Americans; and develop critical thinking skills on Asian American issues through
experential learning/discussions.
200. Multicultural Psychology. Staff.
Please see our website for more current information: asam.sas.upenn.edu
201. (COMM201, SOCI150, SOCI231, URBS215) Topics in Asian American Sociology. (C) Staff.
Topics vary. Please see our website for more current information: asam.sas.upenn.edu
SM 202. (CINE272, ENGL272) Topics in Asian American Literature. (C) Staff.
Topics vary. Please see our website for more current information: asam.sas.upenn.edu
SM 203. (HIST223, HIST231) Topics in Asian American History. (C) Staff.
Topics vary. Please see our website for more current information: asam.sas.upenn.edu
SM 205. (URBS207) Asian American Communities. (C) Khan.
Who is Asian American and how and where do we recognize Asian America? This interdisciplinary
course explores the multiple factors that define Asian American identity and community. In order to
provide a sketch of the multifacted experience of this growing minority group, we will discuss a wide
variety of texts from scholarly, artistic, and popular (film, cinematic) sources that mark key moments in
the cultural history of Asia America. The course will address major themes of community life including
migration history, Asian American as model minority, race, class, and transnational scope of Asian
America. In combination with the readings, this class will foster and promote independent research
based on site visits to various Asian American communities in Philadelphia and will host community
leaders as guest lecturers.
212. (SAST212) Topics in Asian American Film. (C) Staff.
Topics vary. Please see our website for more current information: asam.sas.upenn.edu
294. (AFRC294, ARTH274, ARTH674, CINE293, LALS294) Facing America. Shaw.
This course explores the visual history of race in the United States as both self-fashioning and
cultural mythology by examining the ways that conceptions of Native American, Latino, and Asian
identity, alongside ideas of Blackness and Whiteness, have combined to create the various cultural
ideologies of class, gender, and sexuality that remain evident in historical visual and material culture.
We will also investigate the ways that these creations have subsequently helped to launch new visual
entertainments, including museum spectacles, blackface minstrelsy, and early film, from the colonial
period through the 1940s.

Page 2 of 3

ASIAN AMERICAN STUDIES
(AS) {ASAM}
354. (HIST354) American Expansion in the Pacific. (C) Azuma.
This class will focus on America's expansion into the Pacific around the turn of the century with the
acquisition of Hawaii and the Phillipines. It can deal with various issues, including the meaning of
"frontier," colonialism, development of capitalist economies in the region, diplomacy, racism,
migration, an American brand of Orientalism in encountering the "natives" and "heathens,"and
histories of the West and the Pacific Islands in general.
SM 590. (SOCI596) Sociology of Education. (M) Kao.
This graduate seminar will introduce students to some of the key theoretical and empirical work in the
sociology of education. We will examine how schools work to maintain or alleviate inequality, and
focus on differences in educational achievment and attainment by race, ethnicity, immigrant status,
class, and gender. We will review work on the eductaional experiences of youth from early childhood
to young adulthood.

Page 3 of 3

