BIOETHICS
(MD) {BIOE}
Information about the Center for Bioethics and the Master's in Bioethics degree offered by the
School of Medicine is available at http://www.med.upenn.edu/mbe. Courses are currently
offered under the subject code BIOE.
L/R 282. (PSCI282) Lying, Cheating, Stealing, and Killing: How to Think About Professional
Ethic. Allen/Emanuel/Hirschmann/Strudler.
Professionals - in business, medicine, law, and politics - face myriad ethical dilemmas in their daily
work life that challenge, and sometimes conflict with, the moral commitments that guide their everyday
life. This course systematically examines the ethical dimensions of these four professional roles,
asking questions such as: Are there limits to what we should sell? How far should competitors go to
"win"? Who should get ventilators in a flu pandemic? Is it morally permissible for physicians to assist
in suicide? Should lawyers represent terrorists or child killers? How far does attorney-client privilege
go? Is it morally justifiable to torture enemy combatants? Should politicians lie?
401. (BIOE601) INTRO TO BIOETHICS. (A)
402. (BIOE602) CON. FOUND. OF BIOETHICS.
505. SEX AND BIOETHICS.
540. Challenging Clinical Ethics: Managing patient/caregiver conflicts through mediation. (M)
Bergman.Prerequisite(s): None.
The contemporary healthcare system in which patients, families, institutions and a multiplicity of
caregivers interact over matters of life and death with legal, ethical, emotional and scientific
complexities inherently gives rise to a variety of disputes. Such disputes are frequently highly charged
and are often emergent in nature. In recent years, mediation has grown exponentially as a dispute
resolution mechanism of choice. Not surprisingly, the success of mediation and a wider understanding
of the process, has led to its application in the realm of healthcare disputes with encouraging results.
This course will initially provide an overview of classical mediation theory and practice. Students will
be introduced to negotiation fundamentals critical to the practice of mediation. Similarities and
differences between mediation in the healthcare field, as distinct from other contexts, will be
examined. All class members will participate in mediation role-plays designed to simulate disputes of
the kind prevalent in healthcare landscape
SM 545. Mediation Intensive I. Edward J. Bergman, Autumn Fiester, Lance Wahlert.Prerequisite(s):
There are no prerequisites for this course.
Students will be placed in a variety of clinical situations in which they will play the roles of disputants
and mediators, with ongoing discussions and critiques of mediator performance. Each student will be
videotaped during their mediation to elicit feedback from the group and to catalyze self-criticism. As
distinct from the course, BIOE 540: Challenging Clinical Ethics, in which negotiation and mediation
theory are taught as a prelude to clinical simulations, this ocurse references the literature solely in
relation to problems encountered in the hands-on mediation of specific cases.
Students may take the mediation intensives in any order; they do not need to be taken from I to IV.
Students may take all 4 intensive courses, as the material will not be repeated.

Page 1 of 6

BIOETHICS
(MD) {BIOE}
SM 546. Mediation Intensive II. Edward J. Bergman, Autumn Fiester, Lance Wahlert.Prerequisite(s):
There are no prerequisites for this course.
Students will have an immersion experience, learning mediation through role-playing simulations. Note
that the format is similar to Mediation Intensive I, butthe Mediation Intensive II will NOT duplicate
simulations. Students in this course will: learn to effectively manage clinical disputes among and
between caregivers, patients, and surrogates through mediation; discover how to define problems and
assess underlying interests to generate mutually acceptable options; role play in a variety of clinical
situations as both disputants and mediators; practice mediation with professional actors;and receive
constructive feedback in a supportive environment. Students will also be required to complete a
written research paper.
Students may take the mediation intensives in any order; they do not need to be taken from I to IV.
Students may take all 4 intensive courses, as the material will not be repeated.
SM 547. Mediation Intensive III. Edward J. Bergman, Autumn Fiester, Lance Wahlert.
Students will have an immersion experience, learning mediation through role-playing simulations. Note
that the format is similar to Mediation Intensive I and II, but med. intensive III will NOT duplicate
simulations. Students in this course will: learn to effectively manage clinical disputes among and
between caregivers, patients, and surrogates through mediation; discover how to define problems and
assess underlying interests to generate mutually acceptable options; role play in a variety of clinical
situations as both disputants and mediators; practice mediation with professional actors; and receive
constructive feedback in a supportive environment. Students will also be required to complete a
written research paper.
6tudents may take the mediation intensives in any order; they do not need to be taken from I to IV.
Students may take all 4 intensive courses, as the material will not be repeated.
SM 548. Mediation Intensive IV. Edward J. Bergman, Autumn Fiester, Lance Wahlert.Prerequisite(s):
None.
Students will have an immersion experience, learning mediation through role-playing simulations. Note
that the format is similar to earlier mediation intensives but the mediation intensive IV will NOT
duplicate simulations. Students in this course will: learn to effectively manage clinical disputes among
and between caregivers, patients, and surrogates through mediation; discover how to define problems
and assess underlying interests to generate mutually acceptable options; role play in a variety of
clinical situations as both disputants and mediators; practice mediation with professional actors; use
video-tapes of simulations to improve mediation techniques and strengthen interpersonal skills;
receive constructive feedback in a supportive environment.
Students may take the mediation intensives in any order; they do not need to be taken from I to IV.
Students may take all 4 intensive courses, as the material will not be repeated.
550. Bioethics and Society. (M) MERZ,JON. This is a topics course - for information on the topic
currently being offered, please go to the course listing on the Bioethics website: http://
www.med.upenn.edu/mbe.
This set of courses will deal with bioethical issues in popular culture addressed from a social science
perspective. Courses to be offered include: "Sociology of Bioethics," and "Media and the DoctorPatient Relationship."
551. Sociological Topics in Bioethics. (M) This is a topics course - for information on the topic
currently being offered, please go to the course listing on the Bioethics website: http://
www.med.upenn.edu/mbe.
This set of courses provides a rigorous introduction to the use of sociological methods and
perspective to address bioethical topics and issues. Past courses have inclued the "Sociology of
Medicine," Medical Errors," and "Sociology of Jewish Bioethics."

Page 2 of 6

BIOETHICS
(MD) {BIOE}
552. Anthropological Topics in Bioethics. (M) This is a topics course - for information on the topic
currently being offered, please go to the course listing on the Bioethics website: http://
www.med.upenn.edu/mbe.
This set of courses provides an introduction to the use of anthropological methods and approaches to
address bioethical issues. Courses might include cross-cultural studies of medicine and doctoring,
diversity and the culture of medicine, cross-cultural bioethics.
SM 553. Historical Topics in Bioethics. (M) This is a topics course - for information on the topic
currently being offered, please go to the course listing on the Bioethics website: http://
www.med.upenn.edu/mbe.
This set of courses provides a historical perspective on the field of bioethics and/or key issues or
areas within the field. Courses that might be offered include the history of medicine and the history of
science.
554. Religious Topics in Bioethics. (M) This is a topics course - for information on the topic
currently being offered, please go to the course listing on the Bioethics website: http://
www.med.upenn.edu/mbe.
This set of courses examine the role of spirituality in the field of bioethics. Courses might be taught
from a single religious perspective or provide an overview of many different perspectives. Past
courses have included "Spirituality and Bioethics."
556. Evidence in Bioethics and Health Policy. (A) Maclean.
The ability to critically appraise scholarly work is a necessary skill to effectively contribute to bioethics
and health policy debates, and for development and implementation of health interventions. The object
of this course is to provide students with the skills needed to become fluent in reading and
assessment of empirical bioethics and health service research. The course will review and evaluate a
wide range of qualitative and quantitative methods utilized in bioethics, health policy, and medical
research. Specifically, students will learn the conceptual rational for standard qualitative and
quantitative methods, their strengths and weekness. At course completion, students should be able to
critically evaluate empirical research published in top bioethics, health policy, and medical journals.
558. REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH.
560. Clinical Approaches to Bioethics. (M) This is a topics course - for information on the topic
currently being offered, please go to the course listing on the Bioethics website: http://
www.med.upenn.edu/mbe.
This set of courses examines issues in bioethics from the perspective of the practicing clinician,
physician, nurse, or other health care professional. These courses will often use case studies or
clinical experience to analyze or understand contemporary problems in bioethics. An example of such
a course is "Clinical Dilemmas Through the Life Cycle."
570. Bioethics and Policy. (M) This is a topics course - for information on the topic currently being
offered, please go to the course listing on the Bioethics website: http://www.med.upenn.edu/mbe.
This set of courses will look at bioethical topics from either a legal or public policy perspective. Past
courses have included: Ethics of Managed Care, Law, Medicine and Policy, and Legal Aspects of
Healthcare in America.

Page 3 of 6

BIOETHICS
(MD) {BIOE}
L/R 565. Rationing. Ezekiel Emanuel, Harald Schmidt.Prerequisite(s): None.
You have one liver but three patients awaiting a liver transplant. Who should get the liver? What criteria
should be used to select the recipient? Is it fair to give it to an alcoholic? These are some of the
questions that arise in the context of rationing and allocating scarce health care resources among
particular individuals, what is called micro-allocation decisions. There are also macro-allocation
decisions that focus on how health care systems distributes resources across populations. Using the
cases of organs for transplantation, the rationing for vaccines in a flu pandemic, and oncology drug
shortages, the course will critically examine alternative theories for allocating scarce resources among
individuals. Using both the need to establish priorities for global health aid and to define an essential
benefit package for health insurance, the course will critically examine diverse theories for macroallocation from cost-effectiveness analysis to age-based rationing to accountability for
reasonableness.
571. GLOBAL HEALTH POLICY.
572. GLOBAL BIOETHICS. (A)
575. (HCMG250, HCMG850) The Future of the American Health Care System: Health Policy and
the Affordable Care Act. (A) Ezekiel Emanuel, J. Sanford Schwartz.Prerequisite(s): None. Course
open to graduate students and upper level undergradutes. Freshman and Sophmores may request
permission to enroll. Email mbe-info@mail.med.upenn.edu
This course will provide students a broad overview of the current U.S. healthcare system. The course
will focus on the challenges facing the health care system, an in-depth understanding of the Affordable
Care Act, and its potential impact upon health care access, delivery, cost, and quality.
The U.S. health care system is the worlds largest, most technologically advanced, most expensive,
with uneven quality, and an unsustainable cost structure. This multi-disciplinary course will explore the
history and structure of the current American health care system and the impact of the Affordable
Care Act. How did the United States get here? The course will examine the history of and problems
with employment-based health insurance, the challenges surrounding access, cost and quality, and
the medical malpractice conundrum. As the Affordable Care Act is implemented over the next decade,
the U.S. will witness tremendous changes that will shape the American health care system for the next
50 years of more.
The course will examine potential reforms, including those offered by liberals and conservatives and
information that can be extracted from health care systems in other developed countries. The second
half of the course will explore key facets of the Affordable Care Act, including improving access to care
and health insurance exchanges, improving quality and constraining costs through health care
delivery system reforms, realigning capacity through changes in workforce and medical education,
and potential impact on biomedical and other innovation. The course will also examine the political
context and process of passing major legislation in general and health care legislation in particular,
including constitutional arguments surrounding the Affordable Care Act. Throughout lessons will
integrate the disciplines of health economics, health and social policy, law and political science to
elucidate key principles.

Page 4 of 6

BIOETHICS
(MD) {BIOE}
580. Research Ethics. (M) Merz.
This class is intended to give students a broad overview of research ethics and regulation. The
students will come out of the class with an understanding of the moral bases of scientific ethics and
the historical evolution of biomedical research ethics. Students will be fully conversant with the
development, implementation, and limitation of US human subjects regulation. The course will include
reading assignments and lectures addressing the following topics: ethics and morality in science,
science in society; scientific integrity; misconduct: from FFP to MIM; conflicts of interest; collegiality,
publication, and authorship; ethics codes and regulation; research with human subjects; historical
review of human experimentation; human subjects regulation (HHS, FDA), Institutional Review
Boards; informed consent, waivers, vulnerable populations, privacy and the confidentiality of records;
and research on animals.
585. Ethics of Research in Vulnerable Populations. Prerequisite(s): Either BIOE 580: Research
Ethics or a short set of supplemental background reading.
This is an advanced seminar focused on human subjects research in resource-constrained regions of
the world. Students are expected to have a grounding in US regulations and policies. The students will
come out of the class with an appreciation for issues raised by research involving populations
vulnerable to manipulation and exploitation, a sensitivity to cultural issues, and an awareness of
methods for appropriately engaging communities and performing ethically sound research. The course
includes reading assignments, lectures, case-based and discussions addressing topics ranging from
social and anthropological research, vulnerability and exploitation, biomedical research,
pharmaceutical sponsorship, traditional knowledge and biopiracy, and equity and access.
Grade will be based on 3 written case evaluations (70%) and class discussion adn participation
(30%).
590. Philosophical Topics in Bioethics. (M) This is a topics course - for information on the topic
currently being offered, please go to the course listing on the Bioethics website: http://
www.med.upenn.edu/mbe.
This set of courses provides a philosophical perspective on bioethical topics and issues. This can
include courses that integrate ethical theory with concern for particular applications of theory or
conceptual issues in medicine, health care, and the life sciences. Past courses have included
Philosophy of Death and Dying, Genetics and Ethics, Philosophy of Medicine, Pragmatic Bioethics,
and Feminism and Bioethics.
601. (BIOE401) Introduction to Clinical Bioethics. (A) Fiester.
This course is intended to serve as a broad introduction to the field of bioethics. The course will focus
on three of the most important areas in bioethics: Genetics & Reproduction, Human Experimentation,
and End-of-Life. Each module of the course will cover essential bioethics concepts, relevant legal
cases, and classical readings of that theme. Each module will include one guest lecture from our
distinguished bioethics faculty.
602. (BIOE402) Conceptual Foundations in Bioethics. (B)
This course examines the various theoretical approaches to bioethics and critically assesses their
underpinnings. Topics to be covered include an examination of various versions of deontological
theories, utilitarianism, virtue ethics, principlism, casuistry, feminist ethics, narrative theory, and
pragmatism.

Page 5 of 6

BIOETHICS
(MD) {BIOE}
604. (BIOE504) Empirical Methods in Bioethics. (M)
This course provides an introduction to social science research design and methods for students
interested in conducting research on issues in bioethics. The course is appropriate for students who,
rather than conducting research themselves, will use research findings to make or challenge
arguments in policy statements or other writings. Emphasis is placed on the logic of research design
as the way to relate topic of inquiry with method so that evidence produced is pertinent and useful.
Students will design research projects and xplore a variety of methods available to conduct research.
Students will also learn to integrate research ethics into the formulation and design of their inquiries.
605. MENTORED RESEARCH I.
606. MENTORED RESEARCH II.
607. MENTORED RESEARCH III.
608. MENTORED RESEARCH IV.
SM 688. Bioethics in China: Research, Industry, and Practice. Joe Powers.Prerequisite(s): None.
Course Objective: The intent of this course is to offer students a broad understanding of bioethical
issues in China. Students will be challenged to consider whether there is a unique Chinese Ethic , or
whether Chinese culture and practice can be understood as harmonized with Western values and
morals. Specific topics include: Ethical considerations in outsourcing clinical trials to China;
Pharmaceutical marketing practices in China; Physician-Patient interactions and the notions of
autonomy; Ethics in health policy; Intellectual property and the regulatory landscape; Challenges in
conducting busines and research in China, including organizational practices and business Ethics.
Course Format: Students will travel to Bejing, Nanjing and Shanghai where the program will include
site visits, academic lectures, and meetings with policymakers, Chinese and expatriate business
leaders and others. Visits to significant cultural sites will also be included. Class meetings will be held
prior to and following the trip to China and will include distinguished guest speakers from the US and
abroad.
Student Requirements/Evaluation: Students will be required to read all assigned articles and book
chapters and to come to class sessions prepared for discussion. 25% of the course grade will be
based on student participation in the breakfast journal club and guest presentations. Students will be
required to write a 10-15 page research paper on some aspect of bioethics in China. This paper will
count towards 50% of the final grade. Students will be asked to present their paper at the post-trip
class, and this presentation will count for the remaining 25% of the course grade.
996. Research Topics. (C) This course is only open to students in the Master of Bioethics program.
This course serves the final MBE project. This course requires students to work with faculty to
produce original research that is of publishable quality. Past students have published in Nature,
Science, and other prominent journals.
999. Independent Study. (C) This course is only open to students in the Master of Bioethics
program.

Page 6 of 6

