CHINESE
(AS) {CHIN}

EAST ASIAN NON-LANGUAGE COURSES IN LITERATURE, HISTORY AND
CULTURE
SM 722. (EALC722) ADV CLASSICAL CHINESE II.
004. 2nd Year Spoken Chinese II. (B) Dietrich.Prerequisite(s): CHIN003 or permission of the
instructor. See LPS Course Guide. ** This course fulfills LPS language requirement only. It does not
fulfill the language requirement for other colleges.
This course is the continuation of CHIN003. The primary goal of the course is to improve students'
conversational ability in Chinese. By the end of the semester, students will reach the survival level,
namely, they can accomplish the basic day to day tasks encountered by visitors as well as the local
people. These tasks include relating one's personal life and experiences, expressing preference,
feeling and opinion, ordering a meal, purchasing goods, asking directions, making travel plans,
visiting a doctor, attending a social function and so forth. Short Chinese movies or television shows
will be integrated into the course curriculum. Chinese character will not be taught.
001. First Year Spoken Chinese I. (A) Dietrich. See LPS Course Guide. ** This course fulfills LPS
language requirement only. It does not fulfill the language requirement for other colleges. only.
This course is designed for students who have little or no previous exposure to Chinese. The main
objective of the course is to help students develop their listening and speaking skills. The emphasis is
on correct pronunciation, accurate tones and mastery of basic grammatical structures. By the end of
the second semester, students will be able to manage many situations that have immediate concern
to them, such as relating one's personal life and experiences, expressing preferences and feelings,
ordering meals, purchasing goods, asking for directions. Chinese characters will not be taught.
002. First Year Spoken Chinese II. (B) Dietrich.Prerequisite(s): CHIN001 or permission of the
instructor. See LPS Course Guide. ** This course fulfills LPS language requirement only. It does not
fulfill the language requirement for other colleges.
A continuation of CHIN001, This course is to help students develop their listening and speaking skills.
The emphasis is on correct pronunciation, accurate tones and mastery of basic grammatical
structures. By the end of the semester, students will be able to manage many situations that have
immediate concern to them, such as relating one's personal life and experiences, expressing
preferences and feelings, ordering meals, purchasing goods, asking for directions. To achieve this
goal, the class is to be conducted in Chinese as much as possible. Chinese characters will also be
introduced, but will not be the focus of the class.
003. Second Year Spoken Chinese I. (A) Dietrich.Prerequisite(s): CHIN002 or permission of the
instructor. See LPS Course Guide. ** This course fulfills LPS language requirement only. It does not
fulfill the language requirement for other colleges.
This course is designed for students who have completed one year of college level Chinese classes
or equivalent. The main objective of the course is to improve students' conversational ability in
Chinese. By the end of the second semester, students will reach the survival level, namely, they can
accomplish the basic day to day tasks encountered by visitors as well as the local people. These
tasks include relating one's personal life and experiences, expressing preference, feeling and opinion,
ordering a meal, purchasing goods, asking for directions, making travel plans, visiting a doctor,
attending a social function and so forth. Short Chinese movies or television shows will be integrated
into the course curriculum. Chinese character will not be taught.

Page 1 of 9

CHINESE
(AS) {CHIN}
011. Beginning Modern Chinese I. (A) Dietrich.
Along with CHIN012, CHIN111 and CHIN112, this is the first course of a four-semester sequence. By
completing all four semesters, students fulfill the College language requirement. The sequence starts
each fall. Students cannot begin their study in the spring. This course is designed primarily for
students who have little or no prior exposure to Chinese. The objective of the course is to help
students build a solid foundation of the four basic skills--listening, speaking, reading, and writing in an
interactive and communicative learning environment. The emphasis is on correct pronunciation,
accurate tones and mastery of basic grammatical structures. By the end of the second semester,
students will be able to manage many situations that have immediate concern to them, such as
relating one's personal life and experiences, expressing preferences and feelings, ordering meals,
purchasing goods and asking for directions.
This course is designed primarily for students who have little or no prior exposure to Chinese. The
objective of the course is to help students build a solid foundation of the four basic skills--listening,
speaking, reading, and writing in an interactive and communicative learning environment. The
emphasis is on correct pronunciation, accurate tones and mastery of basic grammatical structures.
By the end of the second semester, students will be able to manage many situations that have
immediate concern to them, such as relating one's personal life and experiences, expressing
preferences and feelings, ordering meals, purchasing goods and asking for directions. In order to
achieve these goals, students are expected to thoroughly preview and review the materials according
to the weekly lesson plan (on course website) prior to attending class. Regular attendance is
mandatory and strictly monitored.
012. Beginning Modern Chinese II. (B) Dietrich.Prerequisite(s): CHIN011 or permission of the
instructor. Along with CHIN011, CHIN111 and CHIN112, this is the second course in a four-semester
sequence. By completing all four semesters, students fulfill the College language requirement.
This course is the continuation of CHIN 011 The objective of the course is to help students build a
solid foundation of the four basic skills--listening, speaking, reading, and writing in an interactive and
communicative learning environment. The emphasis is on correct pronunciation, accurate tones and
mastery of basic grammatical structures. By the end of the second semester, students will be able to
manage many situations that have immediate concern to them, such as relating one's personal life
and experiences, expressing preferences and feelings, ordering meals, purchasing goods and asking
for directions.
022. Intensive Beginning Modern Chinese III & IV. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): CHIN021 or
permission of the instructor. Designed for students who have had limited prior exposure to some form
of Chinese (Mandarin or other dialects), but inadequate to advance to the intermediate level.
Designed for students who have had limited prior exposure to some form of Chinese (Mandarin or
other dialects), but inadequate to advance to the intermediate level.
021. Intensive Beginning Modern Chinese I & II. (A) Staff. Designed for students who have had
limited prior exposure to some form of Chinese (Mandarin or other dialects), but inadequate to
advance to the intermediate level.
This is a two-semester course covering the same material as CHIN011, CHIN012, CHIN111 and
CHIN112. The main objective of the course is to help students build a solid foundation of the four
basic skills--listening, speaking, reading, and writing Chinese. By the end of this course and
CHIN022, students should achieve the following goals: 1)pronounce all the sounds in Mandarin
Chinese accurately and comfortably with a good command of the 4 tones; 2)carry out basic
conversations in daily activities; 3) recognize and reproduce approximately 600-650 characters; and
4) read edited simple stories and write short notes or letters. Grammatical and cultural related issues
are discussed during lecture hours. Oral communication tasks are given every week.

Page 2 of 9

CHINESE
(AS) {CHIN}
031. Beginning Reading and Writing in Chinese I (for Fluent Speakers). (A) Wu.Prerequisite(s):
Restricted to students who can speak Chinese but cannot read or write the language.
Students focus on reading and writing skills. The objective of the course is to lay a solid foundation in
both Pinyin romanization and Chinese characters, learning to produce and recognize approximately
600-650 characters. The class provides preparation for Intermediate Modern Chinese.
032. Beginning Reading and Writing in Chinese II (for Fluent Speakers). (B) Wu.Prerequisite(s):
CHIN 031 or permission of the instructor.
041. Beginning Cantonese I. (A) Staff. Offered through the Penn Language Center. This course
does not fulfill the College of Arts & Sciences' language requirement.
Beginning Cantonese is a preliminary course for spoken Cantonese. The course provides
fundamental aspects of the dialect as experienced in daily life situations and will enable students to
communicate in Cantonese for daily life needs, such as making phone calls, making purchases,
getting around by various means of transportation, seeing a doctor, being a guest or a host at dinner,
talking about the weather, talking about sports and entertainment, etc. The course will be completed
in two semesters.
042. Beginning Cantonese II. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): CHIN041 or permission of the instructor.
Offered through the Penn Language Center. This course does not count toward the language
requirement in the College of Arts and Sciences.
Beginning Cantonese is a preliminary course for spoken Cantonese. The course provides
fundamental aspects of the dialect as experienced in daily life situations and will enable students to
communicate in Cantonese for daily life needs, such as making phone calls, making purchases,
getting around by various means of transportation, seeing a doctor, being a guest or a host at dinner,
talking about the weather, talking about sports and entertainment, etc. The course will be completed
in two semesters.
051. Beginning Taiwanese I. (A) Wu. Offered through the Penn Language Center
Beginning Taiwanese CHIN 051 is designed to help you learn enough about Taiwanese to enable you
to handle your needs adequately if you travel to Taiwan. At this survival level, you will learn to greet
others, introduce yourself and handle basic social situations. You will also acquire the understanding
of oral language typically heard in locations such as grocery store, train station, bus stop and night
market. Self study and classroom participation are equally important for this course. You should
complete each assignment before class so that the teacher may review the work. You should attend
individual session regularly. You will have four quizzes and one final oral test. The preparation should
include memorizing dialogue and listening to audio files.
052. Beginning Taiwanese II. (B) Wu.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 051 or permission of the instructor.
081. Beginning Business Chinese I. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): This course does not fulfill the
language requirement in the College. First meeting mandatory.
The course is designed for students and working professionals who have no prior exposure to
Chinese, and are interested in conducting business in China. The objective of this course is to build a
solid foundation of basic Chinese in the business context, with a main focus on speaking and
listening. Upon Completion students are expected to be able to converse and interact with people in a
variety of business settings. Topics in the course units include meeting people, talking about family,
introducing companies, making inquiries and appointments, visiting company, introducing products,
initiating dining invitations and practicing dining etiquette.

Page 3 of 9

CHINESE
(AS) {CHIN}
111. Beginning Chinese III (Non-Intensive). (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of CHIN012 or the
equivalent or permission of the instructor.
Along with CHIN011, CHIN012 and CHIN112, this is the third course in a four-semester sequence.
The objective of the course is to continue building a solid foundation of the four basic skills--listening,
speaking, reading and writing. By the end of this course, students should achieve the following goals:
1) pronounce all the sounds in Mandarin accurately and comfortably with a good command of the
four tones; 2) carry out simple dialogues of familiar topics; 3) recognize and reproduce approximately
450-500 characters; and 4) read short textbook stories and write simple notes. In order to develop
students' listening and speaking ability, oral communication tasks are given on each lesson.
141. Intermediate Cantonese I. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): CHIN042 or equivalent or permission of the
instructor. Offered through the Penn Language Center.
Intermediate Cantonese is a course for students who are able to communicate in the dialect in basic
survival situations. Through this course the students will acquire a better understanding of Cantonese
and its related culture, and can confidently cope with a wide range of situations. Clases will be
conducted through Cantonese textbooks, discussions of various topics, and composition and
presentation of students' own dialogues so that in time they may express more complex ideas and
feelings. The course will be completed in two semesters.
112. Beginning Chinese IV. (B) Staff.
Along with CHIN011, CHIN012 and CHIN111, this is the fourth course in a four-semester sequence.
The objective of the course is to continue building a solid foundation of the four basic skills--listening,
speaking, reading and writing. By the end of this course, students should achieve the following goals:
1) pronounce all the sounds in Mandarin accurately and comfortably with a good command of the
four tones; 2) carry out simple dialogues of familiar topics; 3) recognize and reproduce approximately
600-650 characters; and 4) read short textbook stories and write simple notes In order to develop
students' listening and speaking ability, oral communication tasks are given every other week.
142. Intermediate Cantonese II. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 141 or permission of instructor.
Offered through the Penn Language Center.
Intermediate Cantonese is a course for students who are able to communicate in the dialect in basic
survival situations. Through this course the students will acquire a better understanding of Cantonese
and its related culture, and can confidently cope with a wide range of situations. Classes will be
conducted through Cantonese textbooks, discussions of various topics, and composition and
presentation of students' own dialogues so that in time they may express more complex ideas and
feelings. The course will be completed in two semesters.
151. Intermediate Taiwanese I. (A) Wu.Prerequisite(s): CHIN052 or equivalent or permission of the
instructor. Offered through Penn Language Center.
A continuation of CHIN052, the spoken and written Taiwanese language.
152. Intermediate Taiwanese II. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of the second semester of
CHIN 151 or permission of the instructor. Offered through the Penn Language Center.

Page 4 of 9

CHINESE
(AS) {CHIN}
211. Intermediate Modern Chinese I. (A) Lee.Prerequisite(s): CHIN112 or permission of the
instructor.
This is an intermediate language course. It aims to develop students' overall linguistic skills in
listening, speaking, reading, and writing Chinese. The specially designed textbook gives introduction
to various topics on Chinese culture. Students can expect to gain knowledge about China while they
are learning the language. By completion of the course, students are expected to be able to master
1200 most frequently used characters in common reading materials, and to communicate with
Chinese on
212. Intermediate Modern Chinese II. (B) Lee.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 211 or permission of the
instructor.
231. Intermediate Reading and Writing Chinese I (for Fluent Speakers). (A) Wu.Prerequisite(s):
CHIN 032 or the equivalent or permission of the instructor. Restricted to fluent speakers who have
only limited reading and writing abilities.
This is an intermediate language class presuming basic fluency in speaking and listening and
focusing on reading and writing abilities. By the end of the class students are expected to have
mastered 1200 most commonly used characters and to have the ability to read basic Chinese texts.
Students will be prepared for Advanced Modern Chinese or the commercial track.
232. Intermediate Reading and Writing Chinese II (for Fluent Speakers). (B) Wu.Prerequisite(s):
CHIN 231 or permission of the instructor.
This is an intermediate language class presuming basic fluency in speaking and listening and
focusing on reading and writing abilities. By the end of the semester students are expected to have
mastered the 1200 most commonly used characters and to have the ability to read basic Chinese
texts. Students will be prepared for Advanced Modern Chinese or the commercial track.
311. Advanced Modern Chinese I. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 212 or permission of the
instructor.
Students learn to work on materials which were written or produced for native speakers, instead of
the classroom materials that were written for the non-native speakers. The reading materials include
a larger vocabulary with more idioms. Students will also learn how to understand and use certain oral
expressions in conversation. They will learn ways to narrate, to describe, and to comment in native
Chinese ways. Reading and audio materials are provided and discussed in the classes. Writing and
oral presentations in Chinese are required in classroom under instruction. Students will be
encouraged to practice oral communication with each other.
312. Advanced Modern Chinese II. (B) Jiao.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 311 or permission of the
instructor.
A continuation of CHIN 311 with more reading and discussions on social and cultural topics.
331. Advanced Chinese Reading and Writing. (C) Chiang.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 312 or permission
of the instructor.
Designed for students with advanced level Chinese language training but who need some further
refinements on pronunciation, grammar, and vocabulary usage, this course stresses oral discussion,
composition, and accuracy of language performance. By reading texts written by contemporary
writers, students will also gain knowledge of China from an analytical and comparative perspective.

Page 5 of 9

CHINESE
(AS) {CHIN}
372. Advanced Spoken Mandarin II. (B) Lee.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 212 or permission of the
instructor.
Following the format of Advanced Spoken Mandarin I with more discussions on current issues in both
China and the US, including topics ranging from race, religion, gender issues to internet, cinema and
pop cultures. The objective of this course is to consolidate the knowledge and skills students have
acquired from their previous Mandarin Chinese classes and to enhance their oral expressive skills. By
the end of the semester, students are expected to be able to carry on a conversation with a native
Mandarin speaker on various common topics, and to gather information necessary for conducting oral
presentations and speeches.
361. Media Chinese I. (A) Chiang.Prerequisite(s): Completion of CHIN 232, 311, 331 or permission
of the instructor.
This course will help students improve their language skills, and enlarge vocabulary through reading
newspapers published in China in the target language. The students will learn formal and high-level
vocabulary and enhance their grammatical accuracy. The class will be conducted in Chinese, and
students will be encouraged to speak Chinese in class using the acquired vocabulary and
grammatical patterns.
362. Newspaper Chinese II. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 631 or permission of the instructor.
A continuation of CHIN 361.
371. Advanced Spoken Mandarin I. (A) Lee.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 212 or permission of the
instructor.
This course is designed for students who have completed at least the intermediate level Chinese
language course, or have studied the language for at least three years. The objective of this course is
to consolidate the knowledge and skills students have acquired from their previous Mandarin Chinese
classes and to enhance their oral expressive skills. By the end of the semester, students are expected
to be able to carry on a conversation with a native Mandarin speaker on various common topics,
including the current issues in China about its education, society, politics, culture, and history.
Students will also learn how to gather information necessary for conducting oral presentations and
speeches.
381. (CHIN581) Business Chinese I. (A) Wang.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 232, 312 or permission of the
instructor.
This course is aimed to enhance students' language skills in a business context and to promote their
understanding about business environment and culture in contemporary China. The text is developed
from real business cases from real multinational companies that have successfully embarked on the
Chinese market. The forms of classes include lectures, drills on vocabulary and sentence patterns,
and discussions. Class will be conducted in Chinese. In addition to the course textbook, students will
learn to read business news in Chinese selected from Wall Street Journal.

Page 6 of 9

CHINESE
(AS) {CHIN}
382. (CHIN582) Business Chinese II. (B) Wang.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 312, 361, 381 or permission
from the instructor.
This course is the second half of a one-year course for business oriented subjects. This course will
provide an overview of China's changing macro-environment, while real business cases let us look
into individual Chinese companies and their development in the new millennium. By the end of the
semester, students are expected to 1) enhance the cultural awareness of contemporary China and
the Chinese business world; 2) gain vocabulary and fluency in Chinese to function more confidently
and comfortably in real business settings; 3) access business news and information in Chinese; 4)
give business presentation in Chinese.
411. Readings in Modern Chinese: Literature. (A) Dietrich.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 331, 361, 382 or
permission of the instructor.
This course is designed for students who have completed three years of college level Mandarin
classes or equivalent. This course may be used to fulfill language or elective requirement for Chinese
major or minor. The objectives of the course are 1) to help students gain an in-depth, multi-faceted
and critical understanding of Chinese people, Chinese society and Chinese culture; 2) to facilitate
students'acquisition of formal or written language; and 3) to develop students' analytical and critical
thinking skills. These objectives are achieved primarily through 1) close reading and discussion of
original literary texts by 20th -century Chinese writers; and 2) regular writing exercises. Students will
also view several Chinese films that are related to the topics of the reading text. The class is to be
conducted exclusively in Chinese.
412. Readings Modern Chinese II: Literature. (B) Dietrich.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 331, 361, 382 or
permission of the instructor.
The main difference between this course and CHIN411 is the reading materials and topics. This
course is designed for students who have completed a minimum of three years of college level
Mandarin classes or equivalent. This course may be used to fulfill language or elective requirement
for Chinese major or minor. The objectives of the course are 1) to help students gain an in-depth,
multi-faceted and critical understanding of Chinese people, Chinese society and Chinese culture; 2)
to facilitate students acquisition of formal or written language; and 3) to develop students' analytical
and critical thinking skills. These objectives are achieved primarily through 1) close reading and
discussion of original literary texts by 20th-century Chinese writers; and 2) regular writing exercises.
Students will also view several Chinese films that are related to the topics of the reading text. The
class is to be conducted exclusively in Chinese.
415. Readings Modern Chinese Documents. (M) Chiang.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 361, 381, 411 or
permission of the instructor.
The main purpose of this content-based course is to promote advance-level language proficiency in
reading, writing, speaking and listening. Through the use of modern Chinese documents, the
secondary purpose of this course is to facilitate your understanding of the changes of Chinese
society in the 20th century. Topics will include the Constitution of China, China's legal system,
speeches by Mao Zedong, Deng Xiaoping, Sun Yet-san and Qiu Jin.
471. Advanced Spoken Mandarin III. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 312 or the equivalent, or
permission of the instructor.
This course is designed for students who have completed at least the intermediate advanced level
Chinese language course (CHIN-311 & CHIN-312) at University of Pennsylvania, or equivalent level.
The objective of this course is to consolidate the knowledge and skills students have acquired from
their previous Mandarin Chinese classes and to enhance their oral expressive skills. Students in this
course are already able to carry on a conversation with a Mandarin speaker on various social topics,
and this course is much more focused on Chinese pop culture from early 20th century till now.

Page 7 of 9

CHINESE
(AS) {CHIN}
481. Advanced Business Chinese I. (A) Chiang.Prerequisite(s): CHIN382 or equivalent or
permission of the instructor. May be offered through Penn Language Center.
This course provides students with the conceptual framework to understand issues China has been
facing since its economic reform in 1978. Topics include WTO principles, the change of China's stateowned enterprises, China's economy in Mao's period, and the pros and cons of globalization.
Students will be trained in reading financial articles, discussing international trades, conducting online
research and giving business presentations. After the course, students will become more
sophisticated in their understanding of China's economic development and in using Chinese business
terminology at professional settings. The course assumes basic background in business and
advanced level proficiency in Chinese language. The course is NOT open to freshman with no
undergraduate business course.
482. Advanced Business Chinese II. (B) Chiang.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 481 or permission of the
instructor.
Following the format of Advanced Business Chinese I, this course covers topics on Eastern and
Western management styles, the global financial market, China's financial market reforms, and
mergers and acquisitions in China. The course is NOT open to freshman with no undergraduate
business course.
491. (EALC221, EALC621) First Year Classical Chinese I. (A) Mair.
Introduction to the classical written language, beginning with Shadick, First Course in Literary
Chinese. Students with a background in Japanese, Korean, Cantonese, Taiwanese, and other East
Asian languages are welcome; it is not necessary to know Mandarin. The course begins from scratch,
and swiftly but rigorously develops the ability to read a wide variety of classical and semi-classical
styles. Original texts from the 6th century BC to the 20th century AD are studied. This course is
taught in English and there are no prerequisites.
492. (EALC222, EALC622) 1st Year Classical Chin II. (B) Mair.
Continuation of CHIN491 EALC221/621, which is the only prerequisite for this course. Upon
completion of Shadick, readings in a wide selection of texts with Chinese commentaries may be
taken up. These readings are in part chosen to reflect student interest. This is the second half of a
year-long course. Those who enroll must take both semesters.
510. Topics in Chinese Culture. (B) Chiang.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 411, 481 or permission of the
instructor.
The objective of this superior level content course is to extend and refine students' language and
analytical skills while enhancing the appreciation of Chinese culture. The course is for students with
native-like competence in Mandarin. Each class will proceed from reading, reflection, and
interpretation, to the exchange of ideas. All reading materials are in Chinese with no glossary and all
are written by scholars whose expertise are wither in contemporary and traditional culture of China,
or in comparative study of Chinese and Western thoughts. Topics include: (1) the shared beliefs and
behaviors of Chinese people; (2) traditional values and new values in the technological and business
society; (3) how affection and love are manifested in Chinese culture; (4) what influenced the surge of
popularity of Chinese wuxia fiction; (5) what it meant to be descendants of Chinese (huayi) living
outside China. The class is conducted exclusively in Mandarin Chinese.

Page 8 of 9

CHINESE
(AS) {CHIN}
515. Topics in Chinese Literature. (M) Dietrich.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 411, CHIN 412, CHIN 415,
481, 482 or permission of the instructor.
This course surveys the literary movements of the post-Cultural Revolution era (1978-present).The
reading consists of fictional works representative of each literary movement. Students will write four
short (1-2 pages, double space) "responding" papers and two longer critical essays (5-7 pages
double spaced). Each student will also give one oral presentation to the class on an assigned story.
This course is designed for students who have achieved native or near native level of reading and
writing proficiency in Chinese. The class is conducted exclusively in Chinese.

Page 9 of 9

