COMMUNICATIONS
(AN) {COMM}
SM 108. The Speaking Body and the Marks of the Mind in Modern Western Culture. (M)
Pearl.Prerequisite(s): Freshman Seminar.
How does the body speak even in the absence of words? In what ways do thoughts, feelings,
messages, and experiences mark the body, revealing the invisible internal and making it visible to the
understanding eye? Have notions of bodily communication changed over time? How were prevailing
ideas about the languages of the body marked by wider philosophical, artistic, literary, scientific, and
medical trends?
In this course, we will explore the speaking body from the eighteenth century through the early
twentieth. Starting with the doctrine of maternal impressions, we will look at the ways in which the
body became marked, and how these markings were expressed and understood. We will then explore
physiognomy, phrenology, hysteria, and shell shock, ending the semester with a provocative
discussion of psychosomatic medicine, and the modern manifestations of phrenology and
physiognomy.
Drawing on a variety of material and types of evidence, we will explore literary and historical
documents, as well as works of art and visual culture. The assignments will be equally wide-ranging,
including response papers, a primary source analysis, presentations, internet searches, visual
analyses, and diary entries. The course will culminate in a written paper which will be produces in
stages with careful and detailed guidance. In preparation for these assignments, we will dive in to the
depths of Van Pelt to explore its treasures, and we will meet with a resource librarian to prepare
ourselves to take full advantage of the resources on offer. We will also take at least one field trip to the
Mutter Museum to examine their holdings and exhibits.
We will emerge from this seminar with a greater understanding of the speaking body, as well as with
a variety of methodological scholarly tools for conducting interdisciplinary research. This course will be
highly demanding, requiring all participants to engage fully with the material and to challenge
themselves to think creatively and rigorously about the themes of the course. Students will receive a
great deal of assistance and writing and research, and will also work closely with one another to share
the unique skills and talents that each brings to the course material.
123. Critical Approaches to Popular Culture. (A) Paxton.
Popular culture has been variously dismissed as mere trivia, "just entertainment;" it has been
condemned as propaganda, a tool of mass deception; and its consumers have been dubbed fashion
victims and couch potatoes. This course considers these critiques, as well as those that suggest that
popular culture offers valuable material for the study of social life. We will consider the meanings and
impact of popular culture, including its effects on how we see ourselves, others, and American life; who
makes distinctions between high, middlebrow, and low or mass culture; and how power and resistance
structure the production and consumption of popular texts.
L/R 125. Introduction to Communication Behavior. (A) Society Sector. All classes. Jordan.
This course is an introduction to the fundamentals of communication behavior. It focuses on social
science studies relating to the processes and effects of mass communication. Research reviewed
includes media use behavior and media influences on knowledge, perceptions of social reality,
aggressive behavior, and political behavior.
130. Mass Media and Society. (B) Society Sector. All classes. Turow.
How might we think about the legal, political, economic, historical, and "cultural" considerations that
shape what we watch on TV, read in books, stare at in billboards? What ideas are relevant for
examining the enormous changes in the mass media system and the consequences of those
changes? The aim of this course is to begin to answer these questions by acquainting you with the
workings of American mass media as an integral part of American society.

Page 1 of 26

COMMUNICATIONS
(AN) {COMM}
203. (SOCI238) Media, Culture & Society in Contemporary China. (M) Yang.
This course studies contemporary Chinese media, culture, and society in the context of globalization.
Major topics include Internet expression and censorship, mass media commercialization,
entertainment media, middle class and consumerism, environmental degradation, new forms of
inequality, and civil society and popular protest. Taking a sociological approach, this course introduces
methods anad theories for analyzing media, institutions, inequality, and social change.
210. Quantitative Research Methods in Communication. (A) Bleakley/Staff.
This course is a general overview of the important components of social research. It presents a
conceptual basis for assessing research quality based on the four types of validity, and also covers the
standard elements of research design, including sampling, measurement, and causal inference. These
concepts are then illustrated through reviews of four research areas: surveys and field studies,
qualitative/ethnographic studies, content analysis, and policy/evaluation studies. The final part of the
semester focuses more on descriptive and inferential statistics, measures of association for
categorical and continuous variables, and the language of data analysis.
SM 211. Media Activism Studies. (M) Pickard.
This seminar provides an introduction to the politics and tactics underlying various types of media
activism. The class will examine interventions aimed at media representations, labor relations in media
production, media policy reform, activists' strategic communications, and "alternative" media making.
The course will draw from an overview of the existing scholarship on media activism, as well as close
analyses of actual activist practices within both old and new media at local, national, and global levels.
We will study how various political groups, past and present, use media to advance their interests and
effect social change. Each member of the class will choose one case study of an activist group or
campaign to explore throughout the semester.
SM 213. Social Media and Social Life. (M) Gonzalez-Bailon.
The irruption of social media as a means of communication has been said to transform many
dimensions of social life, from how we interact with significant others to how we engage in public life but has it, really? Regardless of the specific technology (blogs, micro-blogs, social networking sites,
peer-to-peer networks), social media make interdependence more prevalent, and exposure to
information more pervasive. But social networks, and the ties that bring us together, have long
mediated the way in which we obtain information, engage in public discussion, and are recruited or
mobilized for a public cause. So what has social media brought to the table that is new? This course
will evaluate the evidence that can help us answer this question, as well as challenge conventional
views and discuss questions that remain open. The effects of social media on ideological polarization,
social influence and peer pressure, agenda-setting dynamics, and the formation and effects of social
capital are examples of the substantive topics and theoretical debates that will be considered.
SM 216. Big Data and Social Research. Gonzalez-Bailon.
Big data is stirring a lot of buzz in academic policy and business debates. Even though the label is far
from being unanimously accepted, it has become common shorthand for the vast amounts of
transactional records that we generate daily in our use of digital technologies and online networks. As
with the proverbial glass, however, the promise of big data is seen by many as half empty and by
others as half full. This course will introduce and discuss recent contributions to the debate of how
digital data - and the larger, more granular sets of observations of what we do as we use online
technologies - change social research and the questions we can ask about the social world we inhabit.
Although the use of big data raises many relevant privacy concerns, this course will show that there is
value in stirring the discussion away from normative claims and consider, instead, how big data is
helping us push social research to new, exciting frontiers.

Page 2 of 26

COMMUNICATIONS
(AN) {COMM}
225. Children and Media. (D) Jordan.
This course examines children's relationship to media in its historic, economic, political and social
contexts. The class begins with an exploration of the ways in which "childhood" is created and
understood as a time of life that is qualitatively unique and socially constructed over time. It continues
with a review of various theories of child development as they inform children's relationship with and
understanding of television and other household media. It next reviews public policies designed to
empower parents and limit children's exposure to potentially problematic media content and
simultaneously considers the economic forces that shape what children see and buy. Children and
Media concludes with a critical examination of research on the impact of media on children's physical,
cognitive, social and psychological development.
226. (PSCI232) Introduction to Political Communication. (C) Jamieson.
This course is an introduction to the field of political communication, conceptual approaches to
analyzing communication in various forms, including advertising, speech making, campaign debates,
and candidates' and office-holders' uses of news. The focus of this course is on the interplay in the
U.S. between television and politics. The course includes a history of televised campaign practices
from the 1952 presidential contest through the election of 2012.
230. Advertising and Society. (M) Turow.
This course will explore the historical and contemporary role of the advertising industry in the U.S.
media system. Readings will include social histories of advertising, economic examinations of
advertising's role in society, and critical analysis of the ad industry's power over the media.
237. Health Communication. (M) Hornik/Staff.
An examination of the influence of public health communication on health behavior. The course will
consider: intervention programs addressing behaviors related to cancer, cardiovascular disease, HIV/
AIDS, drug use, obesity and others; theories of health behavior change; issues in the design of
effective health communication programs; concerns about the portrayal of health and medicine on
mass media.
240. (CINE203) Film Forms and Contexts. (M) Messaris.
This course traces the development of the classical Hollywood cinema, as well as significant
alternatives to this dominant mode of representation, by relating analyses of the formal elements of
film texts to discussions of film industries and audiences as well as the larger social, historical context.
A variety of analytical methods and perspectives are applied to films drawn from times and countries in
order to consider the cinema as a cultural construction.

Page 3 of 26

COMMUNICATIONS
(AN) {COMM}
SM 243. Urban Ethnography. (C) Lingel.
How do qualitative social scientists study urban communities? What kinds of powerful tales can be told
about urban lifestyles and social issues in places like Philadelphia? This course will allow students to
study various ethnographic treatments of urban communities in the United States, using films, articles,
TV serials, and books as guides for the framing of their own independent research on the streets of
Philadelphia. Students will also form production teams of two or three people, and these production
teams will be responsible for (i) identifying and researching an important urban issue in contemporary
an important urban issue in contemporary Philadelphia and (ii) turning that research into a 15-30
minute video documentary or pod cast. Mixing video/audio journalism with ethnographic methods will
enhance their skills at archival and social research, from participant observation and interviewing
techniques to sound editing and production. This course is intended to be a rigorous and exciting
opportunity for students to tell empirically grounded stories using the voices of their participants and
the sounds of the city.
L/R 275. Communication and Persuasion. (C) Cappella/Staff.
Theory, research and application in the persuasive effects of communication in social and mass
contexts. Primary focus on the effects of messages on attitudes, opinions, values, and behaviors.
Applications include political, commercial, and public service advertising; propaganda; and
communication campaigns (e.g. anti-smoking).
SM 245. Teens and Screens: Understanding Youth Media Behavior. (C) Bleakley.
Why do screen media and digital technologies captivate youth? In this course we address this
question by examining the role media play in adolescent development and behavior. We begin by
considering adolescence as a unique period of psychological and social development and discussing
emerging adults as a special population. Next, we will explore how adolescents use and interact with
media and how their media preferences are related to their developmental needs, with particular
attention to social media use and media content targeted to, and popular with, adolescent audiences.
Finally, we will investigate how media influence adolescent self-identity and behavior by reviewing
media effects in areas of sex, violence, gender norms, and friendship quality. The strength of the
evidence for media effects and its behavioral and policy implications will be presented and debated
within each area of study. Relevant theoretical perspectives will inform these discussions. Throughout
the semester students will critically reflect upon current empirical research while also spotlighting
different media-TV shows, social media apps (e.g., Yik Yak) and social movements (e.g.,
#iammorethanadistraction).
262. (CINE204) Visual Communication. (C) Messaris.
Examination of the structure and effects of visual media (film, television, advertising, and other kinds
of pictures).
SM 270. (SOCI230) Global Digital Activism. (M) Yang.
This seminar examines the forms, causes, and consequences of global digital activism, defined
broadly as activism associated with the use of digital media technologies (e.g., Facebook, Twitter,
mobile phones, and the Chinese Weibo). The goal is to provide students with a theoretical tool-kit for
analyzing digital activism and to develop a critical understanding of the nature of contemporary
activism and its implications for global social change. Major cases to be examined include the "Occupy
Wall Street" movement in the US, the Arab Spring, the "indignados" protests in Spain, and internet
activism in China. Students are required to conduct primary, hands-on research on a contemporary
case (or form) of digital activism and produce a final research paper. This research project may be
done individually or in small groups.

Page 4 of 26

COMMUNICATIONS
(AN) {COMM}
282. Sick and Satired - The Insanity of Humor and How it Keeps Us Sane. (C) Booth.
The goal of this course will be to prove definitively how and why humor,as both an instigator and
peacemaker, might be considered one of the most influential and profoundly useful forms of
communication devised by human beings. The unique ability of jokes and satire to transcend familiar
literary and journalistic forms for the purpose of deepening (or cheapening) socio-philosophical
arguments and to inspire (or discourage) debate and participation in public conversations about
innumerable political and social issues will be explored. The fearless analytical nature of both high and
lowbrow comedy will be examined, as well as its deflective qualities, and the corollaries construed
from humor's dissection of straight society's monomania will be inspected and tested for cohesion and
viability. Dwayne Booth, the course instructor, has been a freelance writer and cartoonist for twentyfive years, publishing under both his real name and the pen name of Mr. Fish with many of the nation's
most reputable and prestigious magazines, journals and newspapers, including Harper's Magazine,
Truthdig, the Los Angeles Times, the Village Voice, the LA Weekly, the Atlantic, the Huffington Post,
The Nation and others.
SM 290. Special Topics: From Beulah to Awkward Black Girl: Black Women on and in Television
in the United States. (M) Chatman.
The course explores Black women's involvement in the television industry as actors and content
creators, beginning in the 1950s with Beulah and then transitions throughout the decades into the
contemporary moment with Black women's presence in unscripted programs, dramas and web series.
The course engages Black feminist debates about Black women's representation in media, and
interrogates the cultural and political conditions, and industry discourses and practices that coincide
with many of the shifts in Black women's visibility on and in television.
292. WARNING! Graphic Content - Political Cartoons, Comix and the Uncensored Artistic Mind.
Booth.
This course examines the past, present and future of political cartooning, underground comix, graphic
journalism and protest art, exploring the purpose and significance of image-based communication as
an unparalleled propagator of both noble and nefarious idea. The work presented will be chosen for its
unique ability to demonstrate the inflammatory effect of weaponized visual jokes, uncensored
commentary and critical thinking on a society so often perplexed by artistic free expression and
radicalized creative candor. Dwayne Booth, the course instructor, has been a freelance writer and
cartoonist for twenty-five years, publishing under both his real name and the pen name of Mr. Fish with
many of the nation's most reputable and prestigious magazines, journals and newspapers, including
Harper's Magazine, Truthdig, the Los Angeles Times, the Village Voice, the LA Weekly, the Atlantic, the
Huffington Post, The Nation and others. His most recent books are Go Fish: How to Win Contempt and
Influence People, Akashic Books, 2011, and WARNING! Graphic Content, Annenberg Press, 2015.
SM 321. Big Data and Social Research. Gonzalez-Bailon.
Online networks are prevalent in how we access and share information. They shape how we consume
news, how we interact with friends, peers and strangers, and how we mobilize groups or try to gain the
attention of large audiences. Online networks encourage dynamics of information exchange that can,
potentially, be very consequential for the societies we live in or the societies we would like to build.
Networked technologies have, in brief, the potential to transform governance, collaboration, and
organization, and radically change how we think about regulation and policy making in the digital age.
This research seminar aims to help students develop a technical understanding of how networks
operate, what dynamics they are more likely to encourage, and what features limit their ability to
diffuse information or spread behavior. We need to understand the logic of networks - and learn how to
model their complex and counter-intuitive dynamics -before we can analyze their social impact or
engineer interventions, for instance, campaigns to promote socially beneficial behavior.

Page 5 of 26

COMMUNICATIONS
(AN) {COMM}
294. Chicks and Cyborgs: Gender, Technology and Culture. (C) Lingel.
Information and communication technologies (ICT) are powerful tools of connectivity and social
change, but they also contain embedded ideological tensions that can produce inequalities and
deepen inter-group disparities. At the core of this class is a sustained analysis of the effects of gender
on the development and use of ICT. Drawing on a range of theories for communication, gender,
information, media, sexuality and technology, this course helps students understand feminist critiques
of science and technology; develop critical analyses of public policies that have consequences; identify
barriers to the recruitment and retention of historically marginalized groups in the technology industry;
and understand frameworks for thinking about communication technologies as shaping everyday life.
SM 300. Public Space, Public Life. (C) Marvin/Staff.
Public space as a mediated system of communication anchored in embodied practice. Historical
aspects, public space as a cultural signifier, how the organization and regulation of collective spaces
facilitates and enriches or hinders common life, public space as a critical component of democracy.
SM 301. Introduction to the Political Economy of Media. (M) Pickard.
This course has two aims. First, assuming that communications are central to any society, it situates
media systems within larger national and international social relationships and political structures.
Second, this course critically examines the structures of the communication systems themselves,
including ownership, profit imperatives, support mechanisms such as advertising and public
relations,and the ideologies and government policies that sustain these arrangements. Considering
case studies ranging from traditional news and entertainment media to new digital and social media,
the course provides a comprehensive survey of the major texts in this vibrant sub-field of media
studies.
SM 322. History and Theory of Freedom of Expression. (C) Marvin.
Origins, purpose, theory, practice of freedom of expression in the West. Philosophical roots of
contemporary debates about expressive limits, especially problems associated with media of
communication. Major topics include, but are not limited to sexual expression, hate speech, traitorous
and subversive speech, campaign finance, non-verbal expression, artistic expression, privacy.
SM 323. Contemporary Politics, Policy and Journalism. (B) Hunt.
A course on the modern media and its impact on government and politics. It primarily covers the postWatergate/post-Vietnam era of journalism, the past quarter century. Each week focuses on specific
topics and areas of post-Watergate journalism, as well as current press coverage of national events
over the prior week. This course gives students the opportunity to interact and discuss the intersection
of the press, politics, and public policy with some of the leading practitioners in the field.
SM 332. (PSCI332) Survey Research and Design. (M) Dutwin.
Survey research is a small but rich academic field and discipline, drawing on theory and practice from
many diverse fields including political science, communication, sociology, psychology, and statistics.
Surveys are perhaps the most ubiquitous tool of measurement in the social sciences today. Successful
practitioners develop expertise in the art and science of survey methodology, including sampling
theory and practice, questionnaire instrument development and operationalization, and the analysis
and reporting of survey data. Survey researchers are scientists of the method itself testing various
practices by which surveys can be improved upon, as well as developing a keen understanding of the
nature of error in surveys and how to control it. This course is a canvass course on survey research
and design, highly experiential but also based upon introductory statistical theory and analysis.

Page 6 of 26

COMMUNICATIONS
(AN) {COMM}
SM 339. Critical Perspectives in Journalism. (M) Zelizer.
This course aims to provide students with a critical understanding of journalism. It combines
theoretical perspectives on the making of news with primary source material produced by and about
journalists. Students will analyze theoretical material on journalism -- about how news is made,
shaped, and performed -- alongside articles and broadcasts appearing in the media, interviews with
journalists in the trade press, and professional reviews. Topics include models of journalistic practice,
journalistic values and norms, gatekeeping and sourcing practices, storytelling formats in news, and
ethical problems related to misrepresentation, plagiarism, and celebrity.
SM 377. Philosophical Problems of Journalism. (C) Romano.
An exploration of the relationship between journalism and philosophy by examining particular issues in
epistenmology, political philosophy, ethics, and aesthetics. Among likely topics: the concept of a "fact";
the role of the press in the state; whether journalists (like doctors and lawyers) opperate according to a
specialized "professional" ethics; and the limits of journalism as a literary or visual genre. Course
reading will include philosophical texts, breaking print journalism, and blogs that specialize in media
issues.
SM 341. Children's Media Policy. (C) Jordan.
This course takes a philosophical, historical, and practical approach to understanding why and how
the US media industries are regulated. It begins by examining the philosophical tension regarding free
speech rights vs. child protection obligations and the media effects beliefs that would drive media
regulation. Next, it examines the process of media policy formation and implementation, including the
role of regulatory agencies, industry lobbyists, academic researchers and child advocates in
advancing distinct policy agendas. Throughout the course we survey a range of policy actions, from
legislatively required parental monitoring tools (such as the V-Chip) to voluntary industry efforts (such
as network restriction of junk food advertising). We consider evidence of the success of these efforts in
limiting children's exposure to damaging content and in improving parents' ability to supervise their
children's media use.
362. Visual Communication Lab. (M) Messaris.Prerequisite(s): COMM240 or COMM262.
This laboratory provides an opportunity for students to explore, through actual media production, many
of the conceptual principles and research findings discussed in COMM240 and COMM262. (Requires
Permssion of Instructor.)
SM 374. (PSCI374) Communication and Congress. (M) Felzenberg.
This course will examine how Congress goes about the business of translating the public's concerns
into legislation and keeps the public informed of its progress. It will examine how the two chambers
interact in this process, what role the media plays in shaping Congress's agenda and vice versa, and
what impact the advent of 24 hour news, C-SPAN and the internet have had on Congressional
deliberations. A historical approach will be taken in considering the evolution of both chambers and the
media's coverage of them. Students will examine differences between the House and Senate in both
their institutional development and how they go about communicating with each other, the general
public, and the other branches and levels of government.

Page 7 of 26

COMMUNICATIONS
(AN) {COMM}
SM 378. Journalism & Public Service. (B) Romano.
In this course we examine links between journalism and public service by scrutinizing core concepts
involved, practices that sometimes put journalism and public service in conflict (e.g., investigative
reporting, coverage of war), and how journalism stacks up against other forms of public service from
NGO work to government employment. Beginning with a reading of Robert Coles's classic The Call of
Service, we dissect the notion of the "public," assess so-called public-service journalism by reading
Pulitzer-Prize-winning examples, and reflect on the news media as a political institution. Individual
weeks focus on such topics as the conflict that arises when a journalist's obligation to a confidential
source clashes with a duty to the judicial system, whether the business of journalism is business, how
journalism and NGO work compares as public service, and whether journalism by committed political
activists (such as public service, and whether journalism by committed political activists (such as I.F.
Stone) surpasses mainstream "neutral" journalism as a form of public service.
SM 385. Media Activism and Social Change. (C) Garry.
This course offers students the opportunity to explore the relationship between the media industry and
the public and the role groups and movements can play in holding the media accountable to serve the
public interest. We will wrestle with what that responsibility looks like by engaging the following
questions: What obligations do media outlets have to offer fair, accurate, unbiased and inclusive
representations in news and entertainment? How do media "insiders" understand this responsibility?
Is it clear when a talk show host "crosses the line?" How do we define balance? Are there really two
sides to every issue? What is media advocacy? What does it look like? What are the strategies and
tactics employed by media activists? How do media insiders effectively contend with media outsiders
lobbying for change? These questions will be explored in historically contextualized ways, using a
diverse menu of social and political movements and examining the issues with recourse to all sides of
the political spectrum.
SM 386. Nonprofit Communications Strategy. Garry.
The success of a nonprofit organization as defined by its efforts to fulfill its mission is tied directly its
ability to clearly articulate its need, its vision and the specific programs it does or will employ to
achieve that mission. This clear and persuasive communication is integral to its ability to raise funds, to
establish a credible voice for lobbying or advocacy and in its efforts to engage the widest possible
base of stakeholders. This class will explore the ways in which nonprofits engage in strategic
communications. We will look at public service campaigns, ongoing press efforts, social media
strategies, fundraising appeals and public speaking.
SM 391. Politics, Media, & Public Diplomacy. (C) Morey.
This advanced level seminar focuses on the relationship between U.S. and global politics and the
media. It examines the complex and often paradoxical relationship between politics and media, the
role of journalism today, and the definition of media and related normative questions. In addition, this
course focuses on the changing and critically important role of public diplomacy-the way the U.S. and
other nations communicate to the world. This course is designed to provide students an overview of
the above subjects and to acquaint them with key areas of related literature-sensitizing them as well to
the complex interaction between politics and the press. In addition to a roughly 5000-word paper
covering a relevant subject selected by students, the course will help develop important pragmatic
skills in terms of verbal and short-form communications. For some classes, a number of highly
accomplished special guests will be utilized.

Page 8 of 26

COMMUNICATIONS
(AN) {COMM}
SM 388. Ritual Communication. (B) Paxton.
This course explores the significance of rituals as communicative events in American culture. We will
examine both the "how" and the "what" of ritual communication and, with the aid of several ritual
theorists, we will come to better understand the unique language of ritual. We will pay particular
attention to the ways in which rituals contribute to the making and re-making of social groups, be they
religious, political, familial or institutional. And we will necessarily attend to the obverse: the ways in
which rituals create and perpetuate boundaries between "us" and "them" and between "appropriate"
and "deviant" social behavior. Starting with birth and ending with death, this course will focus largely
on what are called "lifecycle" rituals or "rites de passage". We will look at rituals that focus on individual
transitions -- the quinceanera for example -- as well as those that mark transitions on a far larger scale
such as presidential elections. We will explore rituals that unfold at the local level and are experienced
"up close" as well as those that most Americans experience only via the media.
390. Managing in the Information Economy and the Media Sector. (M) Noam.
This course covers a subject that is important for management success in the present and for an
understanding of the emerging Information Economy. The course brings together many of the strands
of an entire MBA program -finance, marketing, accounting, pricing economics, strategy, production,
market research, technology and people management, and government relations. For each of these
functions it looks at the differences in the management of digital activities to the more traditional
approaches in industry and finance. It does so by focusing in depth on the sector furthest along in its
digital transformation, that of media, information and communications, and projecting its lessons.
Lecture topics are media and startup finance; content production and valuation; HR management for
creatives; the marketing, pricing, and distribution of digital products; technology and innovation
management; intellectual asset management; and more. For each of these functions we assemble a
set of MBA tools and a set of societal policy perspectives. We cover several media industries
throughout the course, from film& theater, print & TV, to telecom, internet, electronic media devices,
and cloud-based TV.
In terms of format, the course provides lectures and cases. Lectures are also fully available online in
text formats, enabling off-site review. The Final Paper s a business plan for a project by startups or
established firms utilizing next-generation (Gigabit) broadband. Other paper topics are possible.
SM 395. Communication and the Presidency. (D) Eisenhower.
This course will examine the vital aspect of communication as a tool of the modern Presidency.
Reading and class discussions will focus on case studies drawn from modern Presidential
administrations (beginning with FDR) that demonstrate the elements of successful and unsuccessful
Presidential initiatives and the critical factor of communication, common to both. This course is also an
introduction to primary research methods and to the use of primary research materials in the
Presidential Library system. Applications for course available in the Undergraduate Office. Preference
given to ComPS students. Majors only.
SM 397. New Media and Politics. (M) Winneg.
This course seeks to trace the evolving relationship between new media and the political process from
three perspectives: the voter, the political campaigns, and the news media. It will trace these changes
beginning with the 1996 presidential campaign and end with the 2010 midterm campaigns and
suggest implications going into the 2012 campaign.
In traditional media research, studies were either about "what media do to people" (effects studies)
or "what people do to media" (Use and Gratifications). This course will discuss how changes in
technology in the 21st century re-examines the relationship between media and the audience and how
this change in media landscape may affect politics in ways that previous studies never examined and
understood before the popularization of the Internet, email, texting, blogging, social media and twitter.
Assignments will include: weekly paper and a final paper.

Page 9 of 26

COMMUNICATIONS
(AN) {COMM}
SM 402. Arab Uprisings: Local and Global Representations. (M) Kraidy.
This course explores the Arab uprisings as abattleground where multiple narratives battle for visibility
across a variety of media platforms. We will examine local and global representations of the popular
movements that have swept Arab countries since December 2010, analyzing different media, styles
and modalities of representations. We will focus among other things on social media, political humor,
graffiti, and the human body as instruments of communication, and focus on various related debates
and polemics about the political impact of technology, the effectiveness of political satire, and the role
of gender and sexuality in revolutionary politics. The overall approach of the course is critical/
theoretical.
SM 417. The Politics of Digital Media Policy. Pickard.
This discussion-oriented course examines key digital media policy debates and their underlying
politics. We will examine policies affecting news and entertainment media, social media,
telecommunications, and the Internet. Drawing from major texts within this growing sub-field, we will
formulate analyses about the future trajectory of U.S. and global digital media and evaluate relevant
policies in relation to democratic theory and ethical concerns. In particular, we will focus on how media
policy is shaped by political processes in and outside Washington, D.C., and consider to what extent
new digital media have disrupted pre-existing policy regimes. Students will choose one specific case
study of a digital media policy debate to explore throughout the semester.
SM 404. (PSCI404) Media and Politics. (C) Mutz.
Media and Politics will examine multiple issues specific to the past and present political media
environment in the United States. Focus will be primarily, though not exclusively on the contemporary
news media (as opposed to political advertising and other marketing-oriented communications). Topics
will include the rise of partisan media, selective exposure, news as entertainment, etc. Reading
expectations will be relatively heavy, and under the supervision of the professor, students will be
expected to write a research paper on a topic not directly a part of the course material.
SM 405. Facing Race: Race and Caricature in the Historical Imagination. (C) Pearl.
Is race imaginary? If so, who invented facial distinctions and why can we see them? Do pictures
change the way we think? How do artists think about the people they draw and satirize? This course
will explore the relationship between caricature and perceptions of racial difference in modern western
culture. We will interrogate the role that visual images play in framing our perceptions of groups and
their defining characteristics. Broadly historical, this interdisciplinary course will introduce students to
scholarship in visual culture, media studies, science studies, and race theory. Students will develop
skills in primary source analysis, historical methodology, and visual analysis. Assignments will include
a visual analysis, 4 short papers, and a final exam.
SM 414. Modeling for Complex Social Systems. (C) Centola.
The course provides a hands-on practicum for learning how to model social systems using the
NetLogo Agent Based Modeling environment. Previous experience with programming is helpful, but
not required. Models can be used without programming, and participants will learn how to use the
NetLogo language to alter, extend, and create new models. The emphasis of the course is on how to
think about complex social systems, and how small changes in social interactions can produce large
consequences for collective behaviors. Topics covered include: dynamics of Segregation, Riots, Small
World Networks, Social Movements, Complex Contagions, Cultural Polarization, Witch Hunts,
Collective Problem Solving, Collective Intelligence, and the World Wide Web.

Page 10 of 26

COMMUNICATIONS
(AN) {COMM}
SM 418. Nothing New Under the Heavens: The History of 'Old Media'. (A) Pearl.
In this course, we will explore the history of media innovations and revolutions in the Western world.
Following a brief look at early cave writing and papyrus, we move to early modern developments in
print-making. We will analyze different methods of image reproduction, focusing in particular on the
printing press and its social and cultural impact. We will discuss the implications of the printing press
for literacy, political life, democracy, the post, and visual culture. We track track changes in print culture
through the nineteenth century, thinking about the relationship between the explosion in printed
material and the development of the middle class. We will connect changes in print culture to early
photography, film, and radio, thinking about how this history created the conditions of possibility for
"new media." In this class, we search for continuities that will help us frame current debates and
scholarship on new media and its implications.
SM 419. Communication, Culture & Revolution. Kraidy.
This seminar explores revolutionary communication and cultural expression. Looking at the ongoing
Arab uprisings in comparative perspective, we will examine modalities of communication through
which revolutionaries express themselves, describe and attack incumbent dictators and other
opponents, call for new social solidarities, and construct revolutionary political identities. Revolutionary
contexts are considered as battlegrounds where multiple narratives contend for visibility. We will
explore relevant debates and polemics, historical and contemporary, concerning the political impact of
technology and the role of gender and sexuality in revolutionary politics. We will focus on social media,
political humor, graffiti, and the human body as instruments of communication. The overall approach of
the seminar is theoretical, critical and transnational.
SM 423. Communication and Social Influence Laboratory. (M) Falk.Prerequisite(s): COMM275 or a
media effects or persuasion course at ASC, psych, or Wharton.
Considerable resources are devoted to constructing mass media campaigns that persuade individuals
to change their behavior. In addition, individuals powerfully influence one another without even
knowing it. Still, our ability to design and select optimal messages and interventions is far from perfect.
This course will review investigations in social and cognitive psychology and communication sciences
that attempt to circumvent the limits of introspection by using biological and implicit measures, with
particular focus on neuroimaging studies of social influence and media effects.
SM 485. Globalization and the Music Video. (C) Kraidy.
This seminar focuses on the music video genre to explore topical and conceptual issues at the heart
of the globalization of the media and cultural industries. After a formative period largely grounded in
North America and Western Europe, the music video migrated to other parts of the world in the 1990s
as a wave of privatization and liberalization engulfed national media systems worldwide. Based on a
variety of scholarly and trade readings about the globalization of media and culture, the changing
media and creative industries, and the music video genre itself, questions to be tackled include: What
changes when a media form migrates from its original context? What does the content of music videos
reveal about socio-economic and cultural change worldwide? How do music videos rearticulate
gender and sexuality, and nationalism? What transnational circuits of ideas, images and ideologies are
enabled or constrained by music video?

Page 11 of 26

COMMUNICATIONS
(AN) {COMM}
SM 439. Media Criticism. (M) Zelizer.
Criticism has at its core an assumption of judgment about the target or performance being evaluated.
Yet whose judgment is being articulated? On which basis and authority? To which ends? And with
which effects? This course examines the shape of contemporary media criticism, focusing on its
meaning function in different domains of popular culture (including music, television, news, and film)
and the patterns by which it is produced. Students will become acquainted with theories and ongoing
debates about contemporary media criticism themselves. The course aims to sensitize students to the
nuances of their own consumption of criticism and patterns by which it is typically produced.
SM 462. (CINE462) Digital Media Lab. (M) Messaris.Prerequisite(s): COMM 240, COMM 262, or
other course with the current instructor of COMM 462.
The Digital Media Laboratory provides students with an opportunity for the practical exploration of
theories and principles of audio-visual communication.
L/R 470. Freaks and Geeks: People on Display. (C) Pearl.
In life as in fashion, either you are in or you are out. Except in life, the inside and the outside are
always changing, depending on who makes the rules, where the inside is situated, who is doing the
displaying. In this course, we will explore who the freaks are and who who they were, where they can
be found, how they came to be defined, and how this changed. Starting with the nineteenth-century
freakshow, we move through time charting outsiders and their representations, including male and
female hysterics, war wounded, medical "cases," and the mentally ill. As we progress through the
twentieth century, will discuss subcultures and alternative communities, thinking through the rise of
"geek chic" and the dominance of the computer geek as a reversal of traditional trends. We will discuss
current models of the exhibition of human types, including bodyworlds and The Learning Channel
programming. As we circle around our own moment in time, we will ask: who are the freaks today?
This interdisciplinary course will incorporate historical primary source documents, scholarly secondary
works, a range of creative materials including films , plays, television shows, and works of art.
SM 490. SPECIAL TOPICS IN COMM. (M)
SM 491. Communication Internship. (D) Haas.
Seminar for students concurrently participating in department-approved internships in communicationrelated organizations. Students will develop independent research agendas to investigate aspects of
their internship experience or industry. Building on written field notes, assigned readings, and
classroom discussion and evaluation, students will produce final papers using ethnographic methods
to describe communications within their site or industry in order to understand and critically examine
their hands-on experiences.
493. Independent Study. (D)
494. Honors & Capstone Thesis. (D)
First semester of the two semester thesis course; completed during the Fall semester of senior year.
The senior thesis provides a capstone intellectual experience for Honors students and Communication
and Public Service Program (ComPS) participants. Students conduct a primary research study on a
communication related issue over the course of two semesters. Students should consult with and
arrange for a faculty supervisor no later than the summer before senior year. Students must also file a
designated form and topic statement, approved and signed by the supervising faculty member no later
than the first day of class. Required of all students planning to enroll in COMM 495 or COMM 499 in
the Spring. All Honors students must have a 3.5 cumulative GPA at the end of junior year for eligibility.
See the Annenberg website for complete eligibility requirements.

Page 12 of 26

COMMUNICATIONS
(AN) {COMM}
495. COMPS Capstone Thesis. (D) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Written proposal approved by both thesis
supervisor and major chair.
Second semester of two semester thesis course. Successful completion of Comm 494 is required for
enrollment. The capstone thesis is a requirement for all Communication and Public Service Program
participants. Students complete the primary research project started during COMM 494. For students
graduating with a 3.5 cumulative GPA after completing COMM 495 with a grade of 3.7 or higher, the
capstone thesis may be designated as a senior honors thesis in communication and public service.
SM 498. (PSCI439) Experimental Design. (M) Mutz.
The main goal of this course is to familiarize students with experiments, quasi-experiments,
population-based survey experiments and field experiments as they are widely used in the social
sciences. By the end of the course, students will be expected to understand what it is about a study
that allows for a strong causal inference. Whether one is reading about studies in a newspaper or
reading academic journal articles, it is important to know how to distinguish convincing versus
unconvincing evidence of any given claim. As a final project, students will be expected either to
develop their own original experimental design or to analyze the evidence pertaining to a causal claim
of their choosing based on what they have learned in class. Throughout the course of the semester,
we will also consider how to deal with the issue of causality as it occurs in observational studies, and
draw parallels between experimental and observational research.
499. Senior Honors Thesis. (D) Staff.
Second semester of two semester thesis course. Completion of Comm 494 with a grade of 3.3 or
higher and a 3.5 cumulative GPA at the end of the Fall semester of senior year are required for
enrollment. The Senior Honors Thesis provides a capstone intellectual experience for students who
have demonstrated academic achievement of a superior level. Students complete the primary
research project started during COMM 494.

Graduate Courses
500. Proseminar. (A) Staff.
Introduction to the field of communications study and to the graduate program in communications.
Required of all degree candidates. Open only to graduate students in communication.
SM 501. (Mis)Communication: The History of a Discipline. Pearl.
There is a field of Communication. But is there a discipline? This course will explore the development
of the academic study Communication in a broad historical context. We will examines the emergence
of the field in the United States, Canada, and England, thinking critically about the differences in each
country both historically and today. As we consider what counts as Communication, focusing in
particular on the links between qualitative and quantitative research, we also ask what gets left
outside. What fields claim a relationship to Communication, and what fields have tried to sever all ties?
How are these related areas of study -- including Rhetoric, Composition, Journalism, Production,
Cinema Studies, and (most recently) New Media -- linked to the field of Communication, and what are
the stakes for their autonomy? To answer these questions, we will explore the role of applied material
in the modern academy and the status of practical and professional Communications research relative
to theoretical academic pursuits. We will try (with full expectation of failure) to answer the question:
What is communication?

Page 13 of 26

COMMUNICATIONS
(AN) {COMM}
SM 506. Introduction to Media Policy. Pickard.
This interactive and discussion-oriented course provides an introduction to key media policy debates,
ranging from policies affecting news and entertainment media to telecommunications and the Internet.
The course traces the history and politics of media policy through the development of radio, television,
telecommunications, and digital media. Understanding these policies in relation to democratic theory
and ethical concerns, the course examines how media policy is shaped in and outside Washington,
D.C., and it considers the central role policy plays in structuring the kinds of media that we consume
and create.
SM 509. Directed Readings in Theory. (M) Marvin/Pearl.
In the crush of academic life, it is not always as easy to read dense theoretical texts carefully and in as
much details as we'd like. This course offers a chance to slow down, step back, and revel in the
opportunity to read informing texts that address the relationship between social theory and
communication. Here are texts that are often quoted; we will explore their content and place them in
conversation with one another, with their interlocutors, and with ourselves. Besides lively discussion,
requirements include several essays and a long-form critically annotated citation analysis of a
foundational text.
522. Introduction to Communication Research. (A) Delli Carpini/Hornik.
The logic of scientific inquiry and the nature of research. Hypothesis development, research design,
field and laboratory observation and experimentation,measurement, interviewing and content analysis,
sampling, and basic statistical analysis. Required of all degree candidates. Open only to graduate
communication students.
SM 525. (PSCI525) Introduction to Political Communication. (M) Moehler.
This course is designed as a PH.D.-level introduction to the study of political communication, and is
recommended as a foundational course to be taken early in ones course of study for students
interested in political communication as a primary or secondary area of research and teaching. As an
introduction to the field it is structured to cover a wide-range of topics and approaches, including
media institutions and the effects of both mass mediated and deliberative communications. While no
single course can provide comprehensive coverage of a subfield with as long and diverse a history as
political communication, our hope is that you will leave this course with a strong grasp of the major
theories, trends, methods, findings and debates in this area of study, as well as the gaps in our
knowledge and promising directions for future research.
SM 530. Advertising and Society. (M) Turow. Fulfills ASC Institutions Distribution
Advertising and Society will explore the development of the advertising industry in the U.S., the
relationship between the advertising industry and the U.S. mass media, and historical as well as
contemporary discussions of advertising's social and cultural roles.
SM 550. Mass Media Industries. (M) Turow. Fulfills ASC Institutions Requirement
Through theoretical readings and case studies, this course will provide an introduction to the study of
media institutions from the standpoint of business processes, legal frameworks, and public policies.
The first part of the course will sketch the history of major US media and present conceptual
frameworks for understanding industrial, legal and policy approaches to US media institutions. Part 2
will explore key contemporary industrial, legal and policy issues relating to particular US media
industries. Part 3 of the course will use case studies to apply and deepen understanding of the
frameworks and issues.

Page 14 of 26

COMMUNICATIONS
(AN) {COMM}
SM 539. Journalism and the Academy. (M) Zelizer. Fulfills ASC Culture Distribution
Contemporary journalism remains one of the most studied yet unexplained agents of reality
construction. This course tracks theories of journalism across academic disciplines, exploring what is
common and disparate about the varied perspectives they invoke. Topics include the development of
journalism as a field of academic inquiry, histories of news, organizational research on the newsroom,
narrative and discourse analytic work on news-texts, and recent work in cultural studies.
562. (CINE504) Fundamentals of Visual Communication. (B) Messaris.
Introduction to the study of picture-based media: film, television, web, print, and other images. Theory
and research on visual culture, visual "literacy," and visual persuasion.
SM 564. The Digital Image. (C) Messaris.Prerequisite(s): PLEASE NOTE: Instructor's permission
required for enrollment. Course not open to undergraduates.
How is the evolution of digital media transforming the nature of visual communication? With that
question in mind, this course focuses on the following features of visual media: photo-manipulation,
computer-based editing & post-production, animation & special effects, 3D, digital cinema & television,
online video, computer games, virtual reality & virtual worlds.
SM 575. Social Psychology of Communication. (C) Cappella.
Contributions of social psychology to understanding communication behavior: message systems;
social cognition; persuasive communications; attitude formation and change; face-to-face interactions
and small group situations; strategies of attributional and communicative interpretation; mass
communication effects; social influence and networks.
SM 602. Media Ritual. (M) Marvin.
Examines the relationship between ritual, a 'traditional' and essential mode of group communication
and the pervasive media environment of post-traditional society. While societies seem eager to
ritualize with all media at their disposal, the historical innovation of mass mediated ritual appears to
offer a significant challenge to the body-based social connectedness that has long been regarded as
definitive for ritual communication. Students will read from religious, anthropological and media
traditions of ritual scholarship to consider what rituals do, how they do it, how they can be said to
succeed or fail and how mediated ritual modifies or transforms older systems of ritual communication.
SM 609. (PSCI609) Comparative Political Communication. Moehler.
This course explores major themes in the study of political communication from a comparative
perspective. It focuses on how communication affects political behavior, attitudes, and outcomes. In
doing so we will question how different political and social institutions shape individual-level
communication effects. We also examine the roles of mass media and interpersonal communication
under different regime types and economic systems. Finally we also ask how media systems are
influenced by political institutions.
For each topic we will critically examine the working hypotheses, methods, and evidence. The class
is designed to provide a greater understanding of comparative political communication theories, as
well as to develop social science reasoning and methodology. The readings, class discussions, and
assignments will move back and forth between theories, empirical evidence, and public policies. The
seminar will require active student participation in class discussions. The discussions will focus on the
assigned readings for the week, but students are encouraged to discuss additional works that are
relevant. Students must also write an original research paper, which can hopefully become a published
article. The course readings span every major region but students are free to choose a geographic
focus for their research paper.

Page 15 of 26

COMMUNICATIONS
(AN) {COMM}
SM 615. (PSCI635) Experimental Design and Issues in Causality. (C) Mutz.
The main goal of this course is to familiarize students with experiments, quasi-experiments, survey
experiments and field experiments as they are widely used in the social sciences. Some introductory
level statistics background will be assumed, though this is a research design course, not a statistics
course. By the end of the course, students will be expected to develop their own original experimental
design that makes some original contribution to knowledge. Throughout the course of the semester,
we will also consider how to deal with the issue of causality as it occurs in observational studies, and
draw parallels to experimental research.
SM 623. Health Psychology Seminar. (M) Jemmott.
Seminar members shall critically review current applications of psychosocial theory and methodology
to health-related issues with the goal of suggesting new directions that research might take. Preventive
health behavior, HIV risk-associated behavior, psychosocial factors and physical health, practitionerpatient interactions, patterns of utilization of health services, and compliance with medical regimens
are among the topics that will be studied.
640. Analysis of Data in Large-Sample Communication Research. (I) Hornik.Prerequisite(s):
COMM 522 and 524, or the equivalents.
Statement of measurement and substantive models, and strategies for examining the fit of data to
those models. Examples and data are drawn from the media effects literature. Application of data
reduction procedures, contingency tabl analysis, and correlational approaches including regression
and structural equation models.
637. Public Health Communication. (B) Hornik.
Theories of health behavior change and the potential role for public health communication;
international experience with programs addressing behaviors related to cancer, AIDS, obesity,
cardiovascular disease, child mortality, drug use and other problems, including evidence about their
influence on health behavior; the design of public health communication programs; approaches to
research and evaluation for these programs.
SM 639. (COML639, FOLK639) Communication and Cultural Studies. (M) Zelizer.
This course tracks the different theoretical appropriations of "culture" and examines how the meanings
we attach to it depend on the perspectives through which we define it. The course first addresses
perspectives on culture suggested by anthropology, sociology, communication, and aesthetics, and
then considers the tensions across academic disciplines that have produced what is commonly known
as "cultural studies." The course is predicated on the importance of becoming cultural critics versed in
alternative ways of naming cultural problems, issues, and texts. The course aims not to lend closure to
competing notions of culture but to illustrate the diversity suggested by different approaches.

Page 16 of 26

COMMUNICATIONS
(AN) {COMM}
SM 644. Communication and Space. (M) Marvin.
Physicalized space is said to be crucial to public life. Perhaps so. But it is also critical to urbanization,
globalization, modernity, mobility, social hierarchy, flow, scale, imperialism (what Said called the
geography of violence), revolution, intimacy, shopping malls, simulacra, and being-in-the-world. Space
is not only mediated and dialectical; it is a privileged strategy of post-modernity, "the everywhere of
modern thought." So far as media go, the analytic of space implies a shift away from narrative and
toward process and practice as ways of structuring experience. What are the theories that get at this?
How can we use theories of space to think about media and culture, to rediscover the richness of the
world? And what about the explosive iteration of screen culture that logically ought to imperil lived
space but seem to offer new modes for grounding it. We will explore these themes in the relevant
literatures for the purpose of developing fabulously interesting research projets, including some in
visual format. No spatial pre-requisites.
SM 660. Content Analysis. (M) Krippendorff.
An introduction to content analysis, the analysis of large bodies of textual matter, also called message
systems analysis, quantitative semantics, propaganda analysis, and (computer-aided) text analysis.
The course inquires into the theories, methods, and empirical problems common to these analytical
efforts: sampling, text retrieval, coding, reliability, analytical constructs, computational techniques, and
abductive inference. It illustrates these problems by studies of mass media content, interview or panel
data, legal research, and efforts to draw inferences from personal documents typical in psychology
and literature. Students design a content analysis and do the preparatory work for an academic or
practical research project. They may also use the opportunity of forging available theories into a new
analytical technique and test it with available texts, or solve a methodological problem in content
analysis research.
SM 665. (SOCI664) Digital Media and Social Theory. (C) Yang.
This course explores critical issues in contemporary society through the lens of digital media studies
and social theory. The goal is to build constructive dialogues between digital media studies and
contemporary social theory. Special attention will be given to how social theory may inform the
theorizing and empirical analysis of digital culture, politics, and practices. We will read monographs on
globalization, power and control, dissent and protest, self and community, and the public sphere as
they relate to digital media technologies. They include works by McLuhan, Castells, Turkle,
Papacharissi, Lievrouw, Bimber, W. Chun and more. These monographs will be examined alongside
the works of Gramsci, Foucault, Williams, Habermas, Bourdieu, Giddens, and Melucci. Students are
required to submit weekly reading reports, make oral presentations, and complete a term paper.
SM 671. Computational Social Science. (C) Centola.
This is an advanced graduate research seminar in which guest speakers will present cutting-edge
research in Computational Social Science. Our focus will be on carefully reading the speaker's work,
and discussing in detail their theoretical models, empirical methods, and overall scientific contribution.
Participants will also present in the seminar, which will help to prepare them for professional
presentations of their work at conferences and job talks. This seminar will meet weekly.
SM 675. Message Effects. (M) Cappella.Prerequisite(s): COMM 575.
Current research, theory and statistical methods for assessing the effects of messages. Specific focus
on messages designed to have a persuasive effect on attitudes, beliefs, opinions, or behaviors.
Experimental and non-experimental research from mass and interpersonal communication, health,
social psychology, advertising, political science and journalism will be considered. Unintended effects-such as the consequences of violent pornography--are not considered.

Page 17 of 26

COMMUNICATIONS
(AN) {COMM}
SM 703. (LAW 914, PSCI703) International Communication: Power and Flow. (C) Price, M./Katz.
The tumultuous rise of new media technologies, including the Internet and social media, combine with
grinding geopolitical change to create dramatic changes in law and policy regarding speech and
society. This course is an examination of current dilemmas in historical context; about strategic
communications in contrast or challenge to goals of free expression and to the exercise of power over
the flow of information. Taking relevant contexts, including societies in transition, authoritarian
societies, states and societies in conflict, we explore the relationship of the state and other entities to
the flow of words and images, and how these messages impact public opinion, stability, and
democratic growth. We start with a theoretical orientation focused on two competing paradigms- the
paradigm of free expression and the paradigm of national identity, conflict management, and
sovereignty. The class will then explore several case studies viewed through the lens of narrative
theory. Areas of discussion may include case studies such as Ukraine, Russia, Syria, Iran and, as well,
the drama of the development of global internet policy.
SM 697. Popular Culture and Politics. (M) Delli Carpini.
Not surprisingly, most research regarding the media's impact on political attitudes, opinions,
knowledge and behaviors focuses on news and public affairs genres, ignoring the vast majority of
media content labeled "entertainment." Spurred in part by technological, economic, cultural and
political changes that have increasingly blurred the line between news and entertainment, a small but
growing body of empirical research is exploring the political influence of popular culture. In this course
we will critically review this literature, focusing on issues of theory, methods, findings and implications.
699. Advanced Project in a Medium. (C) Staff.
Proposal written in specified form and approved by both the student's project supervisor and academic
advisor must be submitted with registration. Open only to graduate degree candidates in
communication.
SM 701. Introduction to the Political Economy of Media. (M) Pickard.
This course has two aims. First, assuming that communications are central to any society, it situates
media systems within larger national and international social relationships and political structures.
Second, this course critically examines the structures of the communication systems themselves,
including ownership, profit imperatives, support mechanisms such as advertising and public
relations,and the ideologies and government policies that sustain these arrangements. Considering
case studies ranging from traditional news and entertainment media to new digital and social media,
the course provides a comprehensive survey of the major texts in this vibrant sub-field of media
studies.

Page 18 of 26

COMMUNICATIONS
(AN) {COMM}
SM 705. Comparative Media Policies in a Cross-Disciplinary Context. (M) M.Price.
This course will seek to capture the dynamics of media policy developments, across technologies and
across societies. The seminar will draw on the work of the Center for Global Communication Studies
using case studies from Europe, China, India, the US and elsewhere. The following issues will likely be
included: understanding of institutions of censorship in Iran; competing concepts of "internet freedom" ;
the roles of the UN rapporteur on free expression and equivalents at the OSCE, the OAS and in Africa;
concepts of pluralism; varying definitions and judicial examinations of "decency"; political control and
the making of policy concerning satellite transponders; approaches to media independence and
ownership; and changing concepts of public service media.
The course starts from the premise that the policies that govern the media are significant societal
artifacts embedding distinct values, patterns and processes of control in relation to mediation, freedom
of expression and access to information. They are the result of forces-institutional, technical and
cultural-acting toward a particular notion of social order. Media laws and policies are signposts
concerning commitments to democratic aspirations, to ideas of identity and to symbols of a society's
cohesion. Media laws and policies are, as well, an essay on globalization over time.
SM 706. (PSCI805) Analysis of Election Data. (C) Mutz.
This course is intended to serve as a workshop for students interested in the empirical analysis of
elections, public opinion and political communication more generally. The centerpiece of the course will
be an original research paper produced by each student on a topic of his or her own choosing. The
requirements for these papers are fairly open, but demanding: the research papers must a) involve
empirical analysis of a major election data set, b) be oriented toward answering an original research
question selected with the guidance of the instructor, and c) aim to be of publishable quality. There are
no formal prerequisites for the course. However, if you have less than two semesters of statistical
training, and/or no formal background in the study of elections, public opinion or political
communication, then this is probably not the right course for you. In order to be able to formulate an
original research question, you need some background in the literature, which is provided by other
courses, but is not a formal part of this course.
SM 712. Race,Media and Politics. (C) Delli Carpini.
"Race" has and continues to play an important role in American politics. In this course we will critically
review the relevant Communication and Political Science literature with an eye towards understanding:
(1) the role of the mass media in the construction and dissemination of race as a sociopolitical
concept; (2) how race affects political attitudes, opinions and behaviors; (3) the unique methodological
problems researchers face in studying racial attitudes and opinions; and (4) shortcomings in the
existing scholarship on race, media and politics and how these shortcomings might be addressed.
SM 721. Theory and History in Global Communication. (C) Kraidy.
For more than a half century, global communication theory has been shaped by interaction between
worldwide geopolitical developments on the one hand, and theoretical trends in the social sciences
and humanities on the other hand. This course is designed to give you a firm grasp of the historical
trajectory of global communication theory and to develop knowledge of the central debates that have
animated the field since the mid-20th century. We will discuss how these debates have changed,
under what circumstances, and how contemporary scholarship wrestles with them; and how language
and jargon in the field has shifted from "international" to "global." We will also explore why some key
issues and media have received relatively scant attention in global communication research, while
others have arguably been over-emphasized. We will read a mixture of primary sources by luminaries
in the different paradigms that have dominated global communication, complemented with secondary
texts that are carefully selected to give you a sense of the architecture of the field, an understanding of
what sub-areas of global communication scholarship are published and the journals and presses that
publish in those sub-areas.

Page 19 of 26

COMMUNICATIONS
(AN) {COMM}
SM 713. Historical and Visual Culture Methodology. (M) Pearl.
This methodology class will examine different historiographical and visual approaches, particularly as
they relate to the study of communication. Students will be guided through archival research skills,
working extensively with primary sources in their final projects. Each week will feature a different
"research question" that will require archival exploration to answer, and the readings will relate to
different ways to approach the question. The second half of the course will be devoted to developing
and workshopping final projects.
SM 715. (PSCI715) Political Communication. (M) Mutz.
This course examines the role of political communication in influencing political attitudes and
behaviors. Because of the broad nature of the topic, course readings and lectures will be
interdisciplinary, drawing on research in sociology, history, psychology, political science and
communication research. There are two primary goals for the course. One goal is to acquaint graduate
students with the wide-ranging literature on political communication. A second major goal is to
stimulate ideas for original research in the field of political communication. Toward this end, by the end
of the semester students will be expected to be sufficiently familiar with the field to propose original
studies on topics of their choosing. The formulation of an original research question and research
design will be an important component of the final examination.
SM 717. Communication and Development. Moehler.
This course explores the role of communication in classic and current theories of political and
economic development. It addresses the questions: What is development? What are the major
hypotheses about the relationship between communication and development? How have our
hypotheses about communication and development evolved over time in response to changes in
prominent development theories, policy trends, and empirical evidence? What are the effects of
different and political regimes on media systems and visa versa? What actions are being being taken
to enhance media development? How has the media been employed to facilitate socioeconomic
development, good governance, and democratic development? To what extent are media assistance
programs supported by theory and empirical evidence? What should be the focus of future
development efforts?
First, the course surveys the major theories over the past 50 years about how states develop
economically and politically focusing on the role of media, information, and communication as both
causes and consequences of development. It considers how the theories shaped public policies and
investigates the real-world and academic challenges that emerged. Second, the course examines
some current communication and development issues including: Media and conflict; media regulation
in democratic and authoritarian regimes; restrictive media environments and public opinion; elections
and the media; communication and governance; development and changing forms of political
communication, including the mass media, citizen deliberation, and new information and
communication technologies; information access, poverty, and inequality; development communication
and persuasion; and media development interventions and outcomes. For each topic we will critically
examine the working hypotheses, methods, and evidence. The class is designed to provide a greater
understanding of the communication challenges faced by developing countries, as well as to develop
social science reasoning and methodology. The readings, class discussions, and assignments will
move back and forth between theories, public policies, and empirical evidence.
SM 727. Evaluation of Communication Campaigns. (C) Hornik.
The various roles of research in campaign work: foundational research, formative research, monitoring
research, summative evaluation research, policy research. The place for a theory of campaign effects.
The ethics of evaluation research. Alternative designs, measurement, statistical and analytic
approaches.

Page 20 of 26

COMMUNICATIONS
(AN) {COMM}
SM 731. (GSWS731) Beauty & Technology. (M) Pearl.
Have concepts of beauty changed over time? According to Darwin, the meaning of facial expressions
and emotions are consistent across cultures and are universally understood. Modern scholarship
would have us believe that notions of human beauty are framed by facial symmetry and reproductive
fitness, while fashion magazines seem to challenge both these claims. What role does technology play
in communicating and shaping ideas of beauty? By the same token, to what extent is technology
deployed in service of the ideas of those behind the lens? In this course, we will explore changing
notions of beauty and their relationship to the technologies and media through which it is viewed.
SM 750. Seminar in Media Industries. (M) Turow.Prerequisite(s): COMM 550 and/or COMM 530.
This research seminar will center on the processes and social implications of of out-of-home
advertising and other forms of marketing communication. The course encourage students to tackle
emerging issues related to any number of traditional or emerging media, including mobile handsets;
billboards (digital and traditional); event marketing; event sponsorship; transit materials; and the
panoply of in-store marketing vehicles including architecture, packaging, radio, television, computerladen carts, signage, floor mats, and more. Social issues related to these issues are many; they
include privacy, surveillance, industrial constructions of audiences, varieties of redlining ,
understandings of food and food-culture, and definitions of identity and public-private space. Marketers
say that out-of-home advertising is the fastest growing-form of advertising next to internet advertising.
During the past couple of years, every major media conglomerate has joined the race to track and
reach people as they move through the world. Oddly, communication researchers have virtually
ignored this part of our world. So I think there is here an opportunity here to push a new research
agenda.
SM 745. (ANTH740) Media Ethnography: Theory and Practice. (M) Jackson.
This course will allow students to conduct 'critical readings' of ethnographic engagements with
television, radio and film as cultural phenomena. We will examine how ethnographers use their method
and genre to understand the production, reception and circulation of mass media. We will also draw on
contemporary social/critical theory to unpack some of the epistemological assumptions organizing and
anchoring such qualitative work. (The internet will also be discussed.)
SM 753. (LAW 914) The Internet, State Power, and Free Expression: Media Policy Evolution in a
Evolving Global Context. Price.
Global Internet policy is a zone of contestation, with states, corporations, civil society, and "netizens"
seeking to assert particular perspectives. This course studies processes and rhetoric of Internet
policy-making. It seeks to identify the major competing positions and the structures in key countries
charged with projecting and obtaining global consensus. Among the concepts to be analyzed in this
context are "sovereignty," "Internet freedom," "multi-stakeholder involvement," and the growing role of
cybersecurity. There will be sessions on the WCIT meetings in Dubai in 2012 and its predecessors, on
approaches to Internet policy in US, China and Brazil, Russia and India. We shall explore the
relationship between national policy making and global approaches.

Page 21 of 26

COMMUNICATIONS
(AN) {COMM}
SM 760. Social Constructions of Reality. (C) Krippendorff.
This seminar inquires into the principles and processes by which realities come to be socially
constructed and discursively maintained. It serves as an introduction to the emerging epistemology of
communication, which is concerned less with what communication is than with what it does,
constitutes, and actively maintains, including when being studied. The seminar develops analytical
tools to understand how realities establish themselves in language and action, how individuals can
become entrapped in their own reality constructions, how facts are created and institutions take
advantage of denying their constructedness. After reading several exemplary studies, students explore
the nature of a construction on their own. The seminar draws on the discourse of critical scholarship
and emancipatory pursuits, which are allied with feminist writing, cultural studies, and reflexive
sociology. It is committed to dialogical means of inquiry and takes conversation as an ethical premise.
SM 762. Visual Communication Seminar. Messaris.
Implementation of persuasion theories in the design and creation of advertising for social causes.
799. Independent Research. (C) Staff.
Proposal written in specified form and approved by both the student's project supervisor and academic
advisor or another member of the faculty must be submitted with registration.
SM 809. (SOCI809) Digital Media and Social Theory. (M) Yang.
This course explores critical issues in contemporary society through the lens of digital media studies
and social theory. The goal is to build constructive dialogues between digital media studies and
contemporary social theory. Special attention will be given to how social theory may inform the
theorizing and empirical analysis of digital culture, politics, and practices. We will read monographs on
globalization, power and control, dissent and protest, self and community, and the public sphere as
they relate to digital media technologies. They include works by McLuhan, Castells, Turkle,
Papacharissi, Lievrouw, Bimber, W. Chun and more. These monographs will be examined alongside
the works of Gramsci, Foucault, Williams, Habermas, Bourdieu, Giddens, and Melucci. Students are
required to submit weekly reading reports, make oral presentations, and complete a term paper.
SM 846. Ordinary People and the Media: The Demotic Turn.
This course will explore the historical, theoretical and methodological roots of the way media
circulations have been shaped in public moral (including as a category of political) discourse. Evolving
media have been met with evolving discourses of promise and portent, some expressed or
experienced as moral panics. This course will expand the boundaries of commonplace academic and
lay discourses, by looking for sources in American culture to explain the extents and limits of these
ideas of the meaning of mediation. The course will assume significant contributions from American
religious cultures, looking beyond their taken-for-granted (while significant) role in establishing formal
standards of acceptability to inquire specifically about the role of Protestantism as a definitive source
in the American experience. While it is not a singular objective the course, some consideration will be
given to re-thinking how a more substantive understanding along these lines might contribute to a
more robust definition of a specifically American cultural studies tradition.
SM 856. Privacy, Surveillance & Marketplace. (M) Turow.
This class will look at various philosophical and sociological perspectives on privacy, put them into
historical context, and explore some of the dynamics of the contemporary marketplace that may (or
may not) affirm Sun Microsystem CEO Scott McNealy's 1999 comment to reporters and analysts, "You
have zero privacy anyway. Get over it." The class will involve mainly reading and discussion, with
possibly a paper that extends a stream of the readings in a particular direction.

Page 22 of 26

COMMUNICATIONS
(AN) {COMM}
847. Development Communication and Social Change. (C)
If we are to improve our attempts to address serious global problems and resolve devastating conflicts,
we must re-evaluate development communication as a practice and as an approach. Development
communication engages the strategic application of communication technologies and processes to
resolve social problems. This course surveys the field of development communication, from its
historical conceptions toward its current practice. Following our discussions of the dominant
approaches to understanding development communication and subsequent critiques, we consider
alternative approaches advocating participation, liberation, resistance, and recognizing power as a
central dimension. This course takes a critical approach toward understanding how development
organizations produce communication strategies and how strategic interventions communicate
assumptions about development. We discuss how communication campaigns, entertainmenteducation strategies, and digital media are being used in strategic intervention. In the final section, we
explore development discourse concerning the nature of development and social change, through
activist strategies promoting consumption and advocating socialjustice.
SM 848. Decoding the Social World. (M) Gonzalez-Bailon.
Have digital technologies, and the new data they provide, helped us advance old theoretical debates
about communication and the role it plays in social life? How was social thought shaped by previous
technological breakthroughs and how is the digital revolution shaping our theories today? What are the
questions that are still open, the puzzles that require further research and more theoretical
development? This seminar will consider these and related questions, offering a (personal) overview of
the frontiers of communication research as seen through the lens of digital data and with a focus on
the identification of social mechanisms. The discussions will be articulated aroundtwo forthcoming
books:'Decoding the Social World: When Data Science Meets Communication,' and 'The Oxford
Handbook of Communication in the Networked Age,' which will offer a starting point to start thinking
about theoretical problems and the best empirical strategies to solve them.
SM 850. The Body: Theory, Method, Discourse. (M) Kraidy. This seminar examines the body as a
central communication problematic in theory & research. We will read a wide-ranging selection of
essays, articles and books, examining a variety of research traditions that have focused on the body phenomenology, feminism, biopolitics, etc-across the humanities and social sciences. We will explore
how the body has been understood as tool, symbol, icon, battleground, and lived experience. In turn
we will examine contemporary applications, ending with digital culture, of these approaches through
notions of affect, aesthetics, materiality, embodiment, performativity, docility, social action, and creative
insurgency. Though theoretical, this seminar has a strong methodological component focusing on
discourse analysis.
SM 857. Advanced Qualitative Research. (M) Marvin.
For students writing qualitative dissertation proposals. Seminar members will read and respond to one
anothers' developing drafts and preliminary research. We will talk through unfolding projects and
develop research and writing practice. For most students the goal is to produce a defensible proposal
by the end of the semester. In some cases students who are not writing formal proposals but are
beginning to focus on literature review & dissertation design may find this seminar useful. Adviser
approval required for enrollment.

Page 23 of 26

COMMUNICATIONS
(AN) {COMM}
SM 860. (SOCI860) Global Media Activism: The 1960s. Yang.
The long 1960s witnessed the explosion of media and activism on a global scale. From the French
May Movement in 1968 to the Chinese Cultural Revolution, from the student protests in Zimbabwe,
Germany and Brazil to Women's Liberation and the New Left in the United States, political radicalism
was deeply intertwined with activist and alternative media and the mainstream press. The ideological
divide of the Cold War not only failed to stop the transnational flows of the narratives and icons of
radicalism, but gave them a fateful potency. In this process, the meanings and forms of political
activism were transformed. This seminar analyzes this wave of political activism and its media
practices while tracing its long-term consequences, memories, and legacies. Our goal is to understand
media and activism in a pivotal period of global modernity as well as the historical origins of mediated
activism in the 21st century.
SM 867. (SOCI867) Media and Social Movements. (M) Gonzalez-Bailon, Pickard & Yang.
Examines the meanings and roles of media and communication in social movements; analyzes media
reform activism; studies both historical movements and contemporary protests around the world (Arab
Spring, Indignados, Occupy, etc); covers a broad range of theoretical perspectives, especially network
and diffusion theories, political economy, narrative theory, and theories of performance. Students are
required to submit a final research paper.
SM 872. Internet Experiments Practicum. (M) Centola.
Web-based experiments are an exciting new way to do social science research online. They have
created a vast number of new scientific opportunities for studying complex social systems. This course
is an advanced undergraduate / graduate practicum that focuses on how to build Internet experiments.
Class participants will be exposed to the literature in computational social sciencesscience that uses
the Internet to study human behavior. Students will be expected to participate in a hands-on research
project in which we build a new experiment to study complex social behavior. This course requires
strong research and analytic abilities, and would be appropriate for both advanced social science
majors with a strong technical background, and advanced computer science and engineering majors
with a strong interest in social science. The practicum will meet weekly. Interested students will need to
prepare a paragraph describing their interest and preparation for this course, and will be asked to
discuss their background with Professor Centola.
SM 869. Ethnography and the Internet. (M) Lingel.Prerequisite(s): Completion of graduate level
research methods course.
This course covers qualitative and interpretive methods for investigations of socio-technical
phenomena related to digital culture and online life. Concentrating on ethnographic methods, the
course will cover methodological issues common to research on digital technologies, drawing on
theorists from communication, media studies, information studies, sociology, anthropology and internet
studies. In addition to developing a sophisticated understanding of ethical and methodological issues
surrounding ethnography and online life, students will complete a research proposal for a qualitative or
interpretive study of online phenomena.

Page 24 of 26

COMMUNICATIONS
(AN) {COMM}
SM 870. (SOCI820) Introduction to the Political Economy of Media. (M) Yang.
This seminar provides an in-depth analysis of media institutions and practices in modern China, with
an emphasis on the contemporary scene. A main goal is to identify and explore critical new questions
for advanced empirical and historical research. We will read major works on selected media genres
(newspapers, television, radio, films, documentary films, and the internet) and analyze their theoretical
and empirical contributions. Another goal is to understand the causes and dynamics of media control
and media innovation, the formation of publics and counterpublics, and the role of media and political
change. We will examine how the state and the market shape media practices in different media
genres and how media professionals, artists, citizens, and audience negotiate change. The analysis
will be linked to the current scholarly debates on the evolution of Chinese authoritarianism and a
Chinese-style civil society. Students will complete a term paper based on primary research. The
research project may be done individually or in collaboration with classmates,
SM 871. Computational Social Science Seminar. (M) Centola.
This is an advanced graduate research seminar in which guest speakers will present cutting-edge
research in Computational Social Science. Our focus will be on carefully reading the speaker's work,
and discussing in detail their theoretical models, empirical methods, and overall scientific contribution.
Participants will also present in the seminar, which will help to prepare them for professional
presentations of their work at conferences and job talks. This seminar will meet weekly.
SM 883. DESCRIBING YOUR DATA. (C)
This course is for students who have collected empirical data and will explore ways of describing data
for scientific and translational purposes. For example, students will explore different ways to explore
and visualize their data, write about their data (e.g., a conference abstract vs. a blog post), present
present their data (e.g., a conference talk vs. a pop talk) and make their data more reproducible.
Students will also read scholarly work (oversampling, though not limited to work on media effects) and
critique their work in relation to what is known about effective communication and reproducibility.
Students should come prepared to engage with art, science and computer programming.
SM 885. Old Media and Digital Communication in Revolutionary Times. (M) Kraidy.
This doctoral seminar focuses on the material-virtual nexus in the emerging media environment. We
will critically examine transformations undergone by old media like the human body, graffiti, puppetry
and video, in the digital age, in addition to changes in various genres and acts of speech, including
political parody, posing naked and tagging city walls. Aided by a wide, eclectic and provocative
literature, we will pay special attention to two characteristics of the digital media ecology: (1) the
crumbling of boundaries between nations, cultures, technologies, and media; and (2) the often
contentious circulation of discourse enabled by the weakening of borders, especially in revolutionary
times. We will also explore (3) issues of aesthetics and affect in old-new media couplings. The Arab
uprisings will operate as a principal locus for discussion and analysis, but like everything I teach this
seminar will be global in scope and comparative in outlook. Course requirements include a major
research paper, a book review, a reading presentation, and a research presentation.

Page 25 of 26

COMMUNICATIONS
(AN) {COMM}
SM 893. Networks, Theories, and Online Data: New Approaches to Social Change. (C) Centola.
How do fads and innovations spread across a population? Why do political parties polarize, or reach
an unexpected consensus? How can social technologies help to promote the emergence of social
movements and new democratic politics? This course examines theories of social change and
innovation diffusion, in light of methodological advances in network science and computational social
science. The new revolution in computing has creating remarkable opportunities for doing social
science research, and understanding the dynamics of how collective behaviors emerge and spread.
The goal of the course is to think carefully about how formal/predictive modelscan be connected with
empirical data. This course addresses research at the forefront of social science and complex
systems. Participants will get the most out of the material by aggressively pursuing questions that
emerge from the readings, and from participating in hands-on research projects. The expectation is
that students will develop research projects, or mature existingprojects, which will be the focus of their
work for the course. They should use this course as a foundation for developing publishable research.
This course will also focus on the presentation of research - emphasizing clear, intelligible
presentations, suitable for disciplinary conferences.
SM 894. Introduction to Networks. (C) Gonzalaz-Bailon.
Much of what we think and do is shaped by social interactions, by the behavior we see in other people,
or the information we receive from them: we pay attention to what our friends or we monitor news
through the feeds of social media, and we are more likely to use technologies already embraced by
other users. Networks are behind those (and, by extension, most) dimensions of social life. They offer
the language to capture the invisible structure of interdependence that links us together, and the
means to analyze dynamics like diffusion, influence, or the effects of media in an increasingly diverse
information environment. The aim of this course is to introduce networks and the relational way of
thinking. Students will gain the necessary literacy to read, interpret, and design network-based
research; learn how to go from concepts to metrics; and draw and interpret networks through the lens
of substantive research questions. We will pay equal attention to the theory and the empirics of
network science, and set the foundations for more advanced workon networks.
SM 897. Legacy Media in Transition. (M) Turow.
The rise of the digital age has put enormous pressure on so-called legacy media industries. Those are
businesses that rose to fame and fortune in the 19th and 20th centuries but are now having to
fundamentally rethink their plans regarding audiences, subsidies, and delivery technologies. This class
will focus on four legacy media industries: music recordings, newspapers, books, and television. For
each, we will consider the history of the industry, the challenges it has faced in the we will consider the
history of the industry, the challenges it has faced in the evolving digital environment. Students will
write a paper on a topic related to one of these media or another legacy medium in transition.
SM 898. Social Influence, Media Effects and the Brain. (M) Falk.Prerequisite(s): A graduate level
statistics course, ability to read primary research articles in cognitive neuroscience (no course
prereqs, but students with less background may need to do supplemental work at the front end).
Considerable resources are devoted to constructing mass media campaigns that persuade individuals
to change their behavior and individuals exert powerfully influence one another without even knowing
it. Still, our ability to design and select optimal messages and interventions is far from perfect. This
course will review investigations in social and cognitive psychology and communication sciences that
attempt to circumvent the limits of introspection by using biological and implicit measures, with
particular focus on neuroimaging studies of social influence and media effects.
690. BEHAVIORAL MANAGEMENT.

Page 26 of 26

