CRIMINOLOGY
(AS) {CRIM}
120. Data Science I: Applications in Criminal Justice. Berk.
Data Science I will introduce student to the collection, management, and analysis of data. Students
will learn some basic programming in R, a leading programming language for the management and
analysis of large and complex administrative data (big data). Unlike conventional introductory
statistics courses that focus on analysis of data using commerical software packages, this course will
emphasize data collection, management, analysis using basic computer programming and with real
data common in criminal justice settings. Hands on experience will be emphasized. The textbook in
Introductory Statistics with R, second edition, by Peter Dalgaard (Springer, 2009)
270. BIOSOCIAL CRIMINOLOGY. (A) Raine.
Is there a "natural-born killer"? Why don't psychopaths have a conscience? And is it morally wrong for
us to punish those who are biologically-wired for a life of crime? This interdisciplinary biosocial course
argues that answers to these inscrutable questions can be found in the fledging field of
"neurocriminology". This new sub-discipline brings together the social, clinical, and neurosciences to
help us better understand, predict, and prevent future crime. We will explore the biosocial bases to
crime and violence, analyze controversial neuroethical, legal and philosophical issues surrounding
neurocriminology, and take a field trip to prison. This interdisciplinary course presents perspectives
from the fields of psychology, neuroscience, criminology, sociology, law, business, public health,
psychiatry, anthropology, neuroimaging, neuroendocrinology, forensics, nutrition, and pediatrics. It is
suitable for those without a background in biology or criminology. It is particularly relevant for majors in
Criminology, Psychology, Nursing, and Biological Basis of Behavior.
402. (CRIM602) CRIM JUSTICE ANALYTICS. (C)
535. Introduction to Quantitative Methods for Policy Analysis. (C) Owens.
This course is an introduction to the basic mathematical tools and ideas that support quantitative
policy analysis. By the end of the semester, students will be able to identify and explain measures of
central tendency and variation for catergorical and continuous variables; describe the statistical
relationship between two variables; conduct and explain "foundational" statistical tests, including
hypothesis testing and linear regression analysis; manipulate data sets and write simple statistical
programs in Stata.
671. (PSYC671) Violence: A Clinical Neuroscience Approach. (A) Raine.
Developed for both Psychology and Criminology graduates in particular, this interdisciplinary course
outlines a clinical neuroscience approach to understanding violence in which the tools of
neuroscience- neuroanatomy, neurophysiology, neurocognition, neuroendocrinology,
neuropharmacology, molecular and behavioral genetics- are used to help inform the etiology and
treatment of violence. Clinical components include psychopathy, proactive and reactive aggression,
homicide domestic violence, conduct disorder, oppositional defiant disorder, antisocial personality
disorder, crime, and delinquency as well as their comorbid conditions (schizophrenia, drug abuse,
hyperactivity). The interaction between social, psychological, and neurobiological processes in
predisposing to violence will be highlighted, together with neurodevelopmental perspectives on
violence focusing on prospective longitudinal and brain imaging research. Key implications for the
criminal justice system, neuroethics, forensics psychology, and intervention will also be outlined.

Undergraduate Courses

Page 1 of 5

CRIMINOLOGY
(AS) {CRIM}
100. (SOCI233) Criminology. (C) Society Sector. All classes. Hyatt.
This introductory course examines the multi-disciplinary science of law-making, law-breaking, and
law-enforcing. It reviews theories and data predicting where, when, by whom and against whom
crimes happen. It also addresses the prevention of different offense types by different kinds of
offenders against different kinds of people. Police, courts, prisons, and other institutions are critically
examined as both preventing and causing crime. This course meets the general distribution
requirement.
150. Statistics for the Social Sciences. (A) Ridgeway.
Statistical techniques and quantitative reasoning are essential tools for properly examining questions
in the social sciences. This course introduces students to the concepts of probability, estimation,
confidence intervals, and statistical inference. The course has an applied focus and will show students
how to use the statistical concepts and methods to answer social science questions. The course will
require the use of R, a free, open source statistical analysis program. CRIM150 has been approved
for the quantitative data analysis requirement (QDA).
200. (SOCI200) Criminal Justice. (C) Society Sector. All classes. MacDonald.
This course examines how the criminal justice system responds to crime in society. The course
reviews the historical development of criminal justice agencies in the United States and Europe and
the available scientific evidence on the effect these agencies have on controlling crime. The course
places an emphasis on the functional creation of criminal justice agencies and the discretionary role
decision makers in these agencies have in deciding how to enforce criminal laws and whom to punish.
Evidence on how society measures crime and the role that each major criminal justice agency plays
in controlling crime is examined from the perspective of crime victims, police, prosecutors, jurors,
judges, prison officials, probation officers and parole board members. Using the model of social policy
evaluation, the course asks students to consider how the results of criminal justice could be more
effectively delivered to reduce the social and economic costs of crime.
260. Crime and Human Development. (C) Loeffler.
One of the central research problems in criminology is the relationship between human development
and the likelihood of committing crime. This course will examine the tools for measuring the onset of
crime, its persistence, intermittency, and desistence. These tools include the study of birth cohorts of
everyone born in a certain time and place, life course studies of juvenile delinquents and nondelinquents, trajectory analysis of people studied from pre-school through middle age, and interviews
with 70 year old former delinquents who reflect on how their life-course affected the crimes they
committed. This course will also examine the research findings that have been produced using these
tools. Students will be asked to consider what these findings imply for major theories of crime
causation as well as policies for crime prevention.
SM 280. (SOCI380, URBS280) Neighborhood Dynamics of Crime. (B) Loeffler.
Crime varies in time, space and populations as it reflects ecological structures and the routine social
interactions that occur in daily life. Concentrations of crime can be found among locations, with
antisocial activities like assaults and theft occurring at higher rates because of the demographic
make-up of people (e.g. adolescents) or conflicts (e.g. competing gangs), for reasons examined by
ecological criminology. Variation in socio-demographic structures (age, education ratios, and the
concentration of poverty) and the physical environment (housing segregation, density of bars, street
lighting) predicts variations between neighborhoods in the level of crime and disorder. Both
ethnographic and quantitative research methods are used to explore the connections between the
social and physical environment of areas and antisocial behavior.

Page 2 of 5

CRIMINOLOGY
(AS) {CRIM}
300. Law and Criminal Justice. (C) Laufer.
This course explores constitutional criminal procedure or the law of the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth
Amendments to the United States Constitution. Topics included the laws and rules associated with
search and seizure, arrest, interrogation, the exclusionary rule, and deprivation of counsel. Social
science evidence that supports or raises questions about legal doctrine will be examined. No
prerequisites are required.
320. Practical Data Analysis. (B) Heller.
This course provides a hands-on introduction to data analysis for social science, with a focus on
examples from the criminal justice system. Students will gain experience with the practical side of
statistics by learning to explore, analyze, interpret, and present data - tasks which permeate both the
academic and professional practice of criminology (and many other fields). The course will provide
instruction on how to use Excel, Stata, and ArcGIS to answer questions of interest, as well as insight
into how professionals use data in practice.
SM 601. (SOCI681) Pro-Seminar in Criminal Justice. (B) Owens.Prerequisite(s): CRIM 600.
This course examines the scholarship on the causes and consequences of the development of the
criminal justice system. The primary focus of the course is on the historical development and
contemporary impact of key actors in the criminal justice system, such as the police, courts, and
corrections, on society. The course will examine the social and economic effect of criminal justice
policies and practices. The course emphasizes evidence from the available social science research in
the United States, with some reference to research in other European nations.
330. Drugs and Gangs. (A) Owens.
How do markets for illegal goods and services differ from the typical economic markets we participate
in on a daily basis? Why is a gang different from other types of groups, and what makes "gang
related" crime different from other types of criminal behavior? In this class we will study how illegal
markets and illegal groups function, why individuals participate in them, and what federal, state, and
local governments do to disrupt "organized" illegal activity.
Academic research and media reports on drug markets and gang activity will be evaluated
according to economic theories of law, public finance, and organizational behavior. Upon completion
of this course, students will be able to use empirical and qualitative evidence to critique existing and
proposed policies aimed at reducing the social cost of drug use and gang activity.
SM 410. (CRIM610, SOCI410) Research Seminar in Experiments in Crime and Justice. (A)
Loeffler.Prerequisite(s): Any statistics or research methods courses leading to familiarity with Excel,
SPSS, R, Stata, SAS, Matlab, or NumPy.
This seminar focuses on examining data from experiments in criminology including: randomized
controlled trials of criminal justice policies, "natural" experiments in crime, and other quasiexperimental studies. A series of experiments conducted by Penn scholars and elsewhere will be
examined. This seminar also guides criminology majors in writing a research proposal for their thesis.
Students will learn about how to formulate a research question, develop a review of the literature, and
how to apply necessary empirical methods. The final paper for this course will be a research proposal
that can serve as the basis for the student's senior thesis and to satisfy the senior capstone
requirement. Readings will come from the disciplines of criminology, sociology, psychology,
economics, and urban planning.

Graduate Courses

Page 3 of 5

CRIMINOLOGY
(AS) {CRIM}
SM 600. (SOCI680) Pro-Seminar in Criminology. (A) MacDonald.
This course provides an overview of the leading criminological theories of crime. The central focus is
on the major theories of crime developed over the past century from the disciplines of economics,
psychology, and sociology. The course will focus on the application of social science research as a
way to evaluate theories of crime. Special attention is devoted to the issues of measurement of crime
and what is known from the available empirical data. In addition, the course will focus on how these
theoretical perspectives relate to public policy responses to crime.
602. (CRIM402) Criminal Justice Data Analytics. (C) Ridgeway.
This course covers the tools and techniques to acquire, organize, link and visualize complex data in
order to answer questions about crime and the criminal justice system. The course is organized
around key questions about police shootings, victimization rates, benchmarking justice system
performance, identifying crime hotspots, calculating the cost of crime, and finding out what happens
to crime when it rains. On the way to answer these questions, the course will cover topics including
data sources, basic programming techniques, SQL, text mining, regular expressions, and geocoding.
The course will use R, and open-source, object oriented scripting language with a large set of
available add-on packages.
SM 603. Research Methods 2/Crime Analysis. (B) Heller.
This course provides an overview of the application of social science research methods and data
analysis to criminology. The course will place an emphasis on diagnostic and analytic tools for the
data analysis. Students will learn basic statistical techniques for the analysis of social science data
and how to interpret results as part of the rigorous practice of evidence-based Criminology. M.S.
Studentw will perform semester-long, data-based crime analysis project using quantitative analysis to
address a specific research question. Student projects culminate with an oral class presentation and
the submission of a written thesis.
SM 604. Criminology in Practice. (E) Ridgeway.
In this capstone course speakers from the University of Pennsylvania and other academic institutions
and from non-profit research organizations discuss their research, while speakers from government
and criminal justice policy and practice settings -the consumer of research- share their insights.
Members of the cohort interact with all guest speakers.
634. Evidence-Based Crime Prevention. (A) Heller.
This course considers the use of evidence to identify effective crime prevention policies. The course
will teach students to think critically about what constitutes convincing evidence, use benefit-cost
analysis in comparing policy alternatives, and write effective policy memos that can translate research
into practice. We will develop these skills by studying the effects of different policy approaches to
crime prevention including incarceration, policing, gun control, drug regulation, and place-based
interventions, as well as education, social programs, and labor market policies. Emphasis will be on
the methodological challenges to identifying "what works" and the empirical methods to overcome
those challenges.
999. Independent Study and Research. (C) Both terms.
Primarily for advanced students who work with individual faculty upon permission. Intended to go
beyond existing graduate courses in the study of specific problems or theories or to provide work
opportunities in areas not covered by existing courses.

Page 4 of 5

CRIMINOLOGY
(AS) {CRIM}
SM 700. (SOCI700) Advanced Pro-Seminar in Criminology. (A) Staff.
This second year doctoral course is a weekly discussion group designed to help students integrate
their coursework from different disciplines around the unifying perspectives of criminology. It focuses
on preparation for the doctoral comprehensive examination, detailed critiques of published research
reports, and colloquia by leading guest lecturers presenting new research results. Students preparing
for dissertation research on the causes and prevention of crime will report on their developing
research ideas.
SM 701. Advanced Pro-Seminar in Criminal Justice. (B) Staff.
This second year doctoral course is a weekly discussion group designed to help students integrate
their coursework from different disciplines around the behavior and operation of criminal law systems.
It focuses on preparation for the doctoral comprehensive examination, detailed critiques of published
and unpublished research reports, and colloquia by leading guest lecturers presenting new research
results. Students preparing for dissertation research on the behavior of criminal law will report on their
developing research ideas.
800. Thesis Research Project. (C) Staff.
700. RETURN ORIENT FOR VMDPHD.

Page 5 of 5

