DEMOGRAPHY
(AS) {DEMG}
SM 524. (SOCI524) Advanced Topics in the Sociology of the Family. (M) Staff.
The course will review a series of theoretical issues in the sociology of the family and examine major
empirical studies in which theoretical advances have been made. Special attention will be given to
work that has a historical and comparative perspective. Opportunities will be provided for original
research on the family.
L/R 535. (SOCI535) Quantitative Methods in Sociology I. (A) Allison, Smith.Prerequisite(s): Basic
algebra.
This course is an introduction to the practice of statistics in social and behavioral sciences. It is open
to beginning graduate students and--with the permission of the instructor--advanced undergraduates.
Topics covered include the description of social science data, in graphical and non-graphical form;
correlation and other forms of association, including cross-tabulation; bivariate regression; an
introduction to probability theory; the logic of sampling; the logic of statistical inference and
significance tests. There is a lecture twice weekly and a mandatory "lab."
L/R 536. (SOCI536) Quantitative Methods in Sociology II. (B) Allison, Kohler, Park, Schnittker,
Smith.Prerequisite(s): SOCI 535 or permission of instructor.
As the second part of a two-semester sequence, this graduate course focuses on regression analysis
as used in social science research. In particular, we discuss features and assumptions of linear
regression and logistic regression models. We learn how to apply regression models to real social
science data using Stata and how to interpret the results.
SM 541. (GSWS532, SOCI541) Gender, the Labor Force, and Markets. (M) Madden.
Drawing from sociology, economics and demography, this course examines the causes and effects of
gender differences in labor force participation, earnings and occupation in the United States and in the
rest of the developed and developing world. Differences by race, ethnicity and sexual preference are
also considered. Theories of labor supply, marriage, human captial and discrimination are explored as
explanations for the observed trends. Finally, the course reviews current labor market policies and
uses the theories of labor supply, marriage, human capital and discrimination to evaluate their effects
on women and men.
604. (SOCI604) Methodology of Social Research. (B) Harknett, Smith, Wilde, Zuberi.
This course will give students familiarity with the common research methods social scientists use to
conduct research. Ethnographic, interview, survey, experimental and historical/comparative research
methods will be covered. Four themes will be explored: 1) the basics of solid research design, 2) the
various advantages and disadvantages of each method, 3) when the use of a method is appropriate
or inappropriate for the research question, and 4) how to evaluate researchers' claims on the basis of
the evidence they present. These themes will be explored by reading examples of and conducting
exercises designed to give students hands-on experience in each of the methods. Students will
conduct the exercises on a topic of their choice, which together will culminate in their final paper. The
course is required and restricted to second year students in sociology and demography.
607. (SOCI607) Introduction to Demography. (A) Staff.
A nontechnical introduction to fertility, mortality and migration and the interrelations of population with
other social and economic factors.

Page 1 of 5

DEMOGRAPHY
(AS) {DEMG}
609. (SOCI609) Basic Methods of Demography. (A) Elo, Guillot, Smith.
The course is designed to introduce students to basic concepts of demographic measurement and
modeling used to study changes in population size and composition. The course covers basic
measures of mortality, fertility and migration; life table construction; multiple decrement life tables;
stable populations; population projections; and age patterns of vital events. Students will learn to apply
demographic methods through a series of weekly problem sets.
611. (SOCI611) STRUCT. EQUATION MODEL. (M) Allison.
Statistical modeling with multiple equations and latent variables. The first part of the course will focus
on linear models that could be estimated with any of the well-known SEM programs (e.g., LISREL,
EQS, or Amos). Both Mplus and SAS will be used exclusively in this part of the course. The second
part will focus on Mplus models for variables that are categorical, count, or censored. Maximum
likelihood methods for missing data will also be covered.
612. (SOCI612) CATEGORICAL DATA ANALYSS. (M) Allison.
This course deals with techniques for analyzing multivariate data which the dependent variable is a
set of categories (a dichotomy or polytomy). Topics will include linear probability models, logit (logistic)
regression models, probit models, logit analysis of contingency tables, cumulative logit and probit (for
ordinal data), multinomial logit, conditional logit (discrete choice), unobserved heterogeneity, log-linear
models, square tables, response-based sampling, and repeated measures. Methods will be illustrated
using the Stata System. There will be several assignments using Stata to analyzedata provided by the
instructor.
613. (SOCI613) Event History Analysis. Allison.Prerequisite(s): SOCI 536 or equivalent.
An applications-oriented course on statistical methods for the analysis of longitudinal data on the
occurrence of events, also known as survival analysis, failure-time analysis, hazard analysis or
duration analysis. Emphasis on regression-like models in which the risk of event occurrence is a
function of a set of explanatory variables. Topics include accelerated failure-time models, hazard
models, censoring, Cox regression models, time-dependent covariates, completing risks, repeated
events, unobserved heterogeneity, discrete-time methods.
SM 622. (SOCI622) Fertility. (M) Smith, Kohler, H.
The biological, social and demographic factors explaining the levels, trends and differentials in human
fertility. Data, measures, and methods used in the context of the more and the less developed
countries, with an demphasis on the historical and current course of the fertitlity transition.
SM 630. (SOCI630) Advanced Special Topics. (M) Staff.
Topics vary from semester to semester. Course titles include: Race, Colonialism & Methods; Mistakes,
Errors, Accidents & Disasters, Graduate Research Practicum, Sociology of Violence: Gangs &
Organized Crime.
SM 633. (SOCI633) Population Processes I. (A) Elo, Guillot, Parrado, Schnittker.
This is one of two courses that serve as an introduction to core areas of demography and important
developments in the field. Population Processes I introduces students to broad set of issues in health,
mortality, and aging. Readings cover overviews of major topics as well as recent approaches to the
subject. Attention is focused on description and explanation of variation in health across time, space
and social groups. One consequence of mortality decline is population aging. We will cover some of its
implications for individuals, families and societies.

Page 2 of 5

DEMOGRAPHY
(AS) {DEMG}
SM 634. (SOCI634) Population Processes II. (B) Flippen, Harknett, Kohler, Parrado, Smith.
Population Processes II is part of a two-course sequence designed to introduce students to the core
areas of demography (fertility, mortality, and migration) and recent developments in the field. PP II is
divided into two parts. The first focuses on family demography and the biological, social and
demographic factors explaining levels, trends, and differentials in human fertility transition with an
emphasis on the historical and current course of fertility transition in developed and developing
countries. The second part of the course provides a comprehensive review of theories and research
on international migration. Readings examine patterns and processes of global migration during the
classic age from 1800-1914 as well as during the postwar period from 1945 to the present. The course
also covers a history and evaluation of immigration policies around the world, and devotes significant
attention to theoretical and empirical perspectives on immigrant adaptation, including the relationship
between gender and migration.
643. (SOCI643) Social Stratification. Jacobs, Park.
This is an advanced level graduate seminar where we will review contemporary research on social
stratification and mobility. We will examine empirical and theoretical studies not only in the US but also
in other countries to address how the pattern of social stratification varies across societies and over
time. The main topics to be discussed are social mobility, occupational attainment, educational
inequality, gender and race, and family processes and stratification. We will also examine studies that
address how national contexts mediate social stratification. Advanced undergraduate students will be
admitted with permission.
662. (SOCI662) PANEL DATA ANALYSIS.
SM 670. (SOCI670) Family Data. (M) Harknett.
This two semester course will engage each graduate student in an analysis project with qualitative
and quantitative components, using a linked qualitative longitudinal data set. Students will use survey
data from the baseline and 12 month wave of the Fragile Families study (described at http://
crcw.princeton.edu/fragilefamilies/), a national survey of unwed and married parents who have just
had a child (with unmarried parents over sampled) They will also use transcripts and coded data from
the TLC3 study, which involved qualitative couple and individual interviews conducted with a subset of
75 of the couples in the FF survey in 3 waves: about 3 months after the birth and then again 12 and
24 months after the birth. Most of these are low-income, unmarried, cohabiting parents. The goal of
the course is for each student to use these two data sets, and the analytic techniques and literature
covered in the course, to write a paper that can be submitted for publication. The spring will also
include lots of tips on how to construct a publishable paper. Students should only enroll in this course
if they plan to take the spring sequel course as well.
SM 708. (SOCI708) Second-Year Research Seminar II. (B) Staff.
Demography 708 is the second part of a two-course sequence designed to introduce and familiarize
second year students with current norms for academic research, presentation and publishing in the
field of Demography. In Demg708 students are expected to finalize the analyses and to complete their
second year research paper. This is a required course for second year demography students. Others
interested in enrolling in the course may do so with the permission of the Chair of the Graduate Group
in Demography.

Page 3 of 5

DEMOGRAPHY
(AS) {DEMG}
SM 677. (SOCI677) International Migration. (M) Flippen.
A comprehensive review of theories and research on international migration. The course introduces
the basic precepts of neoclassical economics, the new economics of labor migration, segmented labor
market theory, world systems theory, social capital theory and the theory of cumulative causation.
Readings examine patterns and processes of global migration during the classic age from 1800-1914
as well as during the postwar period from 1945 to the present. The course also covers a history and
evaluation of immigration policies around the world, and devotes signification attention to theoretical
and empirical perspectives on immigrant adaptation. Within this larger topic, we will also discuss
internal migration and urbanization; the relationship between gender and migration; the spatial
distribution of immigrants within the United States, immigrant communities, and ethnic enclaves; and
the undocumented population in the United States.
SM 707. (SOCI707) Second-Year Research Seminar I. (A) Staff.
This course is intended to hone the skills and judgment in order to conduct independent research in
sociology and demography. We will discuss the selection of intellectually strategic research questions
and practical research designs. Students will get experience with proposal writing, the process of
editing successive drafts of manuscripts, and the oral presentation of work in progress as well as
finished research projects. The course is designed to be the context in which master's papers and
second year research papers are written. This is a required course for second year graduate students
in Demography. Others interested in enrolling in only one of the courses may do so with the
permission of the Chair of the Graduate Group in Demography.
SM 731. (SOCI731) Advanced Demographic Methods. (M) Smith.Prerequisite(s): DEMG 609 and
SOCI 536 (or its equivalent).
This course considers a variety of procedures for measuring and modeling demographic processes.
We will consider both deterministic (drawn from classic demographic methods, stable population
theory, and the like) and stochastic (drawn from statistics) perspectives and methods, including their
integration. Pre-requisites: DEMG 609 and SOCI 536 (or its equivalent).
SM 777. (SOCI777) Special Topics in Demography. (M) Staff.
Special Topics in Demography
796. (SOCI796) Demographic, Economic, and Social Interrelations. (J) Kohler, Madden.
The course investigates economic and social determinants of fertility, mortality, and migration, and it
discusses the effects of population variables on economic and social conditions, including economic
and social development. Topics discussed in the course include: How do economic changes affect
marriage, divorce, and child bearing decisions? How do households make decisions about transfers
and requests? How can economic and sociological approaches be combined in explanatory models of
demography change? How does immigration to the US affect the ethnic composition of the population,
the earnings of native workers, taxes on natives, and the macro-economy? What causes the aging of
populations, and how will population aging affect the economies of industrial nations, and in particular,
pension programs like Social Security? What accounts for the rise in women's participation in the
wage labor force over the past century? How are family composition and poverty interrelated? Does
rapid population growth slow economic development with low income countries? In addition to these
topics, the course also covers selected methods not included in Dem/Soc 535/536 and 609.

Page 4 of 5

DEMOGRAPHY
(AS) {DEMG}
999. Independent Study. (C) Staff.
Primarily for advanced students who work with individual instructors upon permission. Intended to go
beyond existing graduate courses in the study of specific problems or theories or to provide work
opportunities in areas not covered by existing courses.

Page 5 of 5

