ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 500. Foundations of Research and Scholarship. Barstow, Greco, and Shapiro.Prerequisite(s):
Non-DYNM students must complete a course permit request form: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/
graduate/dynamics/course-permit. DYNM Category: F
A main objective of this foundation course is to improve the academic papers and presentations in all
Organizational Dynamics work, including the capstone. Because the discipline of writing for academic
purposes is based on skills that are not common to business writing and because the writing process
is central to learning in this program, Organizational Dynamics offers this course designed to assist
participants in developing efficient, reliable, and fruitful academic writing and presentation techniques.
SM 501. Perspectives on Organizational Dynamics. (C) Greco.Prerequisite(s): Non-DYNM students
must complete a course permit request: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/coursepermit. DYNM Category: F; DYNM Concentrations: LMC, GL, OC, SD
"Perspectives" is both a fundamental and integrating course intended for MSOD students at any point
in the program who wish to understand and deploy a multiplicity of dynamics operative in
organizations and in the minds that create and inhabit them. It is particularly useful for those in their
first year and for non-MSOD students. One key focus is on understanding the implicit mental and
emotional frameworks or metaphors that "inform" organizing so that we can virtually see more robust
and complex approaches to effectiveness and to leadership within them. Several faculty members
highlight their specialties. One special theme examines new management models and thinking
frameworks designed to prevail in a 21st century context. Lectures, discussion, and experiential
learning are used to build an informed grounding in the history, philosophy, theory and practice of
Organizational Dynamics. The course requirements are active class participation, potential application
projects/weekly journal, a midterm paper and a final paper.
SM 542. Theories & Models That Inform Coaching. (C) Orenstein.Prerequisite(s): Permits for NonDYNM students: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/course-permit. DYNM Course
Category: F; DYNM Course Concentrations: LMC, OC
This course will examine how theory guides the effective practice of coaching. Students will be
introduced to a theory and model that encompasses a multi-disciplinary approach to coaching in an
organizational setting. With this framework as a basis, students will select, research, and present a
theoretical model of their own choosing and design a coaching application that demonstrates theory in
action. Students will leave the course with an array of theoretical frameworks and practical techniques
that will enhance their own coaching capabilities as managers and consultants. Undergraduates may
enroll in 500-level courses only with permission of the instructor. This course will meet on the following
weekends: May 21-22; June 11-12; June 18-19. The final class on 6/19 will be 8:45 to 12:30 pm.
SM 551. Devil's Advocate: Power of Divergent Thinking. (C) Greco.Prerequisite(s): Permits for nonDYNM students: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/course-permit. DYNM Course
Category: A; DYNM Course Concentration: LMC
Short-term or long-term? Us or them? Build or buy? Margin or volume? My way or the highway! Ad
infinitum, apparent forced choices--or no choice--and limited perspectives can create costly tugs of
war or constricted judgment without our minds (and hearts) and in organization dynamics, persuasive,
and often hidden, divergence in thinking offers great opportunity for learning, creativity, and sound
decision-making. This course offers several robust, practical techniques for bringing the value of
diverse perspectives in politically productive ways to leadership thinking, communications, and
organization dynamics. This course will meet between May 24th and June 21st.

Page 1 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 552. Strategic Crowdsourcing & Business Models. (C) Villarroel. For additional information,
please see our website at: http://www.organizationaldynamics@upenn.edu/od.cgi
This online course offers insight on how innovative firms are organizing strategically to gain advantage
from engaging online with the value distributed resources held by a global pool of individuals. Through
cases derived from original research, including Amazon, Facebook, Netflix, oDesk, Kiva, Wikipedia,
among others, this course unveils the business models that these organizations use to create new
value by working with "crowds" online. Open, distributed, online approaches to work and innovation
have been widely studied over the past decade in the context of the computer and software industry
(e.g. Benkler 2002; Chesbrough 2003; von Hippel and von Krogh 2003). Many of those concepts have
since then permeated other industries, eventually giving birth to a distributed organizational paradigm
referred to as "crowdsourcing" (e.g. Howe 2008; Villarroel 2008). The crowdsourcing model has proven
valuable for innovation, work, entrepreneurship, among other applications. For example, in 2011, a
crowd innovation initiative involving 57,000 individuals solved a decade-old scientific problem in
molecular biology in only 3 weeks. In 2012, the top 3 crowd labor platforms brou ght skilled work to 6
million people in over 200 counties. In 2013, US $5 billion are expected to be invested in crowd-funded
projects around the world.
The aims of this course are (1) to gain a solid understanding of the business models in
crowdsourcing; (2) to benefit from first-hand experience with the "power of the crowd", (3) to critically
analyze the potential and limitations of this new organizational paradigm.
553. Becoming a Courageous Follower. (C) Eldred. For additional information, please see our
website at: http://www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
This course will examine both personal and professional behaviors that constitute effective
followership. While the leadership literature is saturated with books on becoming better leaders, there
is a dearth of awareness on finding and supporting those who follow those leaders effectively.
Students will use surveys from the limited literature on effective followership to profile their own
organization's dynamics on styles of followership, and stories of success and failure in confronting
organization mistakes and leadership errors will be researched. The outcome of the class will be a
personal profile on followership style and an organizational profile on its followership culture.
SM 601. Gender Issues in Organizational Leadership. (C) Vanderslice. For additional information,
please see our website at: http://www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
This seminar will explore the intersection of gender and organizational behavior as it has evolved and
in the current social and economic context in this country. We will examine the social, cultural and
structural dynamics within organizations that differentially affect women and men, as well as the
gender-linked resources each brings to organizations. Topics that will be addressed include the debate
over the currect situation of women in the workforce; the social construction of gender; the relationship
of gender and power in understanding gender dynamics in the workplace; the intersection of gender
and class; gender issues in organizational leadership; policy and practice as reinforcers of gendered
dynamics; the interaction of culture and organizational structure; and restructuring organizations to
better meet the needs of women and men in today's culture. The course will 1) address the
development of a theoretical framework for understanidng gender issues in the workplace; 2) explore
more specific ways in which policies and practices have different effects on employees and managers
by virtue of gender and; 3) focus on alternative conceptualizations, structures, policies and practices
that could make it possible for both men and women to be successful in the workplace and to avoid
gender-based discrimination.
In this last section, we will specifically discuss various organizational change processes that
address gender issues within organizations.

Page 2 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 555. The Idea of Nationalism. (C) Steinberg.Prerequisite(s): Permits for non-DYNM students:
https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/course-permit. DYNM Category: A; DYNM
Concentration: GL
Nationalism has been the most important geo-political phenomenon of the past two hundred years. Its
continuing power has been amply demonstrated by recent events in many parts of the world. The
principle of national self- determination and closely related notions of individualism and human rights
shape the global context in which businesses, governments, organizations, and individuals must
operate in the 21st century. This seminar course will explore the ideology of nationalism through the
lens of institutions and organizationscorporations, nonprofits, government, NGOs, unions, religious
communities, etc.
Starting with concrete examples from students own experiences and the contemporary conflicts
confronting governments, organizations, and businesses, we will examine the ideology of nationalism,
its meaning and content, its philosophical foundations, its underlying assumptions about the nature of
human identity, and its contemporary expressions in nationalist movements and ethno-political
conflicts around the world. In the process, we will explore such questions as: What is a nation? Does
every identifiable ethnic or national group have a valid claim to a nation-state of its own? How are
claims to national self-determination justified? Why do nationalist movements seem so often to
engender political extremism and violent ethno-political conflicts? Is national self- determination
compatible with our commitments to individualism, rationality, and universal human rights? What are
the best strategies to cope with the persistence of nationalism in the 21st century?
558. Social Media and the Organization. Havely/Warren.Prerequisite(s): Non-DYNM students must
complete a course permit request: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/course-permit.
DYNM Category: A; DYNM Concentration: LMC
If you don't yet believe in the social media revolution, then watch this: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=ZQzsQkMFgHE Facebook. Twitter. Pinterest. Tumblr. Path. Delicious. Digg. Youtube.Linkedin. It's
been less than a decade since many of these social media services have launched, yet they've
transformed society in many significant ways. Social Media and the Organization will deepen your
understanding of and offer real time practical experience with social media. The course will examine
the current trends and use of social media in marketing, product development, customer service,
networking and other facets of organizational policy and practice. Students will have hands-on
participation online with the class blog, http://upennsocialbook.wordpress.com sharing relevant case
studies, analyzing social media campaigns and critiquing their own organization's culture and values
surrounding social media including social media policy, staff challenges, and evaluation of challenges
and opportunities in its use.
559. Research Methods to Develop Dynamic Expertise. Freeman. For additional information,
please see our website at: http://www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
It's not enough to be competent, educated, smart and professional. Globalization, technology, and
vastly improved communications have increasingly led to "Winner Take All" markets. Consider the local
opera house: 100 years ago, Iowa alone had more than 1,500 of them. Thousands of sopranos earned
adequate, if modest, livings from the live performances, but now, thanks to i-pods, the world's best
soprano can be literally everywhere at once. And since it costs no more to transmit MP3s of Renee
Fleming's Mozart arias than her understudy's, most opera fans listen to Fleming. Thus, Fleming earns
several million dollars a year while most other sopranos, many of whom are almost as talented,
struggle to get by. The same is increasingly true of other professions: Those who are recognized for
being the best at what they do can sell their services anywhere and everywhere at top dollar, whereas
those who lack such recognition find their services valued less and less--if they are valued at all. As
graduate students at the University of Pennsylvania, you have an extraordinary opportunity to become
the leading expert in a given domain in a few short years, maybe less.

Page 3 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 605. (GAFL605) Managing Project Risk, Uncertainty, and the Unexpected. (C)
Hornbacher.Prerequisite(s): Course permits for non-DYNM students: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/
graduate/dynamics/course-permit. DYNM Cateogry: DE, A; DYNM Concentrations: LMC. Course
Schedule: 9/10, 17; 10/1, 15, 29; 11/5, 19; 12/3, 17.
DYNM 605 is a uniquely blended content of thought leadership vetted by subject matter experts
worldwide. This participant-centered seminar is an opportunity to increase both awareness and
knowledge of risk and uncertainty by examining causes of unexpected events in predictive (classic)
and adaptive (agile) project frameworks. Successful applications of non-deterministic approaches
areexplored as antidotes to constrained command and control project environments. Course content is
valuable in roles, organizations, and sectors of all types. Prominent project/operational risk
management methodologies are included in this seminar. Processes advanced by the Project
Management Institute, U.K. Association for Project Management, International Council on Systems
Engineering, and by the International Organization for Standardization are contrasted with industry
specific practices, including the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, NASA, and the Departments of
Defense and Energy. Case examples are based on relevant experience. Participants perform hands-on
implementation of processes in realistic team working sessions and facilitated dialogue. Optional
quantitative tools workshops and tutorials will be available beyond scheduled course work for those
who are interested.
SM 602. Leader-Manager as Coach. (C) Russo.Prerequisite(s): Course permits for Non-DYNM
students: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/course-permit. DYNM Category: A; DYNM
Concentrations: LMC, OC. Course Schedule: 9/24; 10/8 & 29; 11/12 & 19.
New work technologies, increased competition and employees' desire for more involvement in their
work are changing the traditional role of the manager. Rather than directing, planning and controlling
the work, managers and leaders are facilitating processes and coaching and developing their
employees. Team based organizations are built on coaching as a core requirement of the team leader
role. This course explores the theory and practices of individual coaching as leadership behavior. The
focus is on helping managers develop their skills and improve their performances as coaches. We will
examine the need to provide others with successful performance strategies, timely feedback on
strengths and on development needs and growth opportunities in order to challenge others to reach
their potential. We will explore workplace environments that foster the growth and achievement of
those we lead.
SM 603. Leading Emergence: Creating Adaptive Space in Response to Complex Challenges. (C)
Arena.Prerequisite(s): Permit requests for non-DYNM students: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/
graduate/dynamics/course-permit. DYNM Categories: F, A; DYNM Concentration: LMC. In-person
Meeting Schedule: 6/3-5 & 7/15-17.
SM 604. Managing Enterprise Risk. (L) Combrinck-Graham.Prerequisite(s): Non-DYNM students
must complete a course permit request form: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/
course-permit. DYNM Categories: DE, A; DYNM Concentration: LMC
Can operations undertake effective risk management in our globalized, inextricably networked
economy? What risk management role do we play in our organizations? We will apply readings and
engage in case students to discuss whether our organizations do or should manage risks as
strategically as opportunities. We'll also examine our involvement with risk management in our
organizations. By the conclusion of the course, you should have a strong understanding of
organizational risk and a framework for addressing risk in your organization. This course includes
webinar calls on several weeks during the semester in addition to the weekly Wednesday evening
classroom meetings.

Page 4 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 607. Psychodynamics of Organizations. (C) Hirschhorn.Prerequisite(s): Course permits for NonDYNM students: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/course-permit. DYNM Category: A;
DYNM Concentration: LMC
As an area of study, the psychodynamics of organizations draws out attention to the tacit, implicit, and
unconscious dimensions of organizational life. It presumes that a person takes up his or her role at
work by drawing on both individual history and the organizational context that helps define a role, its
boundary, and the resources available to take it up. In both these aspects, the organizational context,
and one's individual biography, people are often unaware of the thoughts and feelings that animate
their behavior. This course will introduce students to some basic concepts of psychoanalysis, which
focuses on individual motivation, and systems psychodynamics, which focuses on group dynamics
and group psychology. System psychodynamics also emphasizes how an organization's primary task,
or its "reason for being," influences individual experience. Readings include case studies as well as
expositions of theory. The instructor will also draw on his own consulting cases.
This course meets Thursdays. In addition there will be two 8-hour Saturday sessions during the
course.
This course fills the following Organizational Dynamics requirements: Category: A Concentrations:
LMC
SM 608. Organizational Dynamics of Working in a Global Marketplace. (C) Tschoegl. For
additional information, please see our website at: http://www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
This course examines some of the sources of confusion, conflict, misperception and error that arise
when representatives of U.S. organizations interact and work in the global marketplace.The aim is to
heighten awareness, help avoid personal or professional pitfalls, and to more effectively manage some
of the organizational and business challenges that arise when operating across dissimilar
environments. We will focus on areas including: ethics, culture, language, ethnicity, religion, gender,
the political and legal systems, labor, corruption, and corporate organization. Each class session will
begin with a short, interactive introductory lecture, followed by discussion around assigned readings
and mini-cases.
SM 613. Is Bigger - Inevitable, Better or Worse in Organizations?. (C) Licht.Prerequisite(s): NonDYNM students must complete a course permit request form: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/
dynamics/course-permit. DYNM Category: F; DYNM Concentration: LMC. Course Schedule: 1/16, 23,
30; 2/6, 20 & 27. 1/16 is 9 to 12; all other meetings are 9 to 5.
Is the modern large corporation alienating, inflexible, unproductive? Is the small organization or work
team engaging, innovative or creative, productive? Has it always been this way in the U.S.? Is change
possible? In this unique, informal, "turbo" seminar, we will examine the large corporation in terms of
history, governance and control, and delivery of (office) work. We will consider whether "bigness" and
bureaucracy are inevitable, and how organizations of the present, and probably the future, are affected
by those of the past. This seminar has been structured to cover a good deal of ground ina short time.
The seminar will meet on six Saturdays. The subject matter of theseminar is the large-scale
organization. Questions to be raised include: 1) Is the modern large corporation alienating, inflexible,
and unproductive? 2) Are bigness and bureaucracy inevitable? 3) Is the small organization or work
team engaging, innovation, creative, and productive? 4) What does the historical record for the United
States reveal? 5) Are organizational alternatives and change possible?

Page 5 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 610. Knowing Yourself: The Coach as an Instrument of Change. (C) Napier.Prerequisite(s):
Non-DYNM students must complete a course permit request form: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/
graduate/dynamics/course-permit. DYNM Category: A; DYNM Concentrations: LMC, OC. Course
schedule: January 16 & 17; February 27 & 28; April 2
Note: This class is predicated on the assumption that prior to offering coaching assistance, a coach
should have a deep understanding of his or her own behavior and its impact on a client. Utilizing
validated tools and strategies available for coaches, the students practice sets of coaching skills on
each other. This includes practice in interviewing and observational skills. In addition, students will
have the opportunity to give and analyze 360 degree feedback data, as well as use a variety of other
instruments that can be foundational for a useful coaching experience. Premise: Coaching others is
very serious business. Intrepid individuals willing to take on this responsibility should be willing to
answer the following questions: Who am I as a leader and helper? What are the assets I bring to the
coaching relationship? What are my deficits, overused strengths, or underutilized skills and behaviors?
What historical influences from my family of origin influence my capacity to build a positive relationship
with my coaching client? Are there discrepancies in relation to my self-perceptions and those who
know me well--family members, peers, colleagues, friends, boss, and direct reports? As a result, are
these specific areas of personal development that I need to address as I move?
Similar to most traditional programs where the focus is on the management of change, the course is
organized to: 1) A diagnostic phase in which the values, history, assumptions, and behaviors of the
client will be assessed. In this case the client will be the student/coach. 2) The applied phase in which
analysis, interpretation, and formal learning will be the central focus. The end result will be individuals
with a deep and abiding understanding of their own psychodynamics and their personal impact.
Finally, by modeling many of the tools and strategies useful in any effective coaching effort and
practicing them on themselves and their student peers, it is hoped that the experiential nature of the
course will allow maximum transference to the real work of coaching.
SM 611. Effective Collaboration for a Changing Global Workplace. (M) Boyer, Legatt, and
Newberry.Prerequisite(s): Non-DYNM students must complete a course permit request form: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/course-permit. Corequisite(s): This course will meet on the
following Saturdays and Sundays: February 27 & 28; March 19 & 20; April 16 & 17.DYNM Categories:
F, DE; DYNM Concentrations: LMC, GL. Course Schedule: 2/27 & 28; 3/19 & 20; 4/16 & 17
This course will meet on weekends. Between March 1st and April 15th there will be weekly 45 minute
Recitation/Discussion Sections that will be scheduled in coordination with student teams and
instructors.
Effective collaboration requires a combination of strong self-awareness and an ability to make
adjustments at the individual and group level. This course provides tools for building teams that
leverage individual strengths and a mutual learning process for continuously addressing collaboration
barriers to improve team performance. This seminar/lab is designed to extend each participant's
analytical skills and and gain practice implementing high performance practices through a team-based
simulation. Specific learning objectives are to: 1. Understand leading-edge frameworks for building
effective teams. 2. Learn and apply tools for diagnosing barriers to collaboration. 3. Develop
implementation plan for teams and organizations consistent with best practices. 4. Provide tools for
self-assessment of participants to leverage their strengths for teamwork success. 5. Apply learning
from classroom-based teamwork simulation to participants' real life experiences.
The course will be conducted in a university classroom and use several breakout rooms for
teamwork among participants. Case study teams will use web-based communication software (TBD)
for inter-session collaboration on projects. Weekly facilitated discussions by course instructors will be
conducted virtually via Google Hangout or comparable platform.

Page 6 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 612. Mastering Organizational Politics and Power. (C) Eldred.Prerequisite(s): Course permit
requests for non-DYNM students: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/course-permit.
DYNM Category: A; DYNM Concentration: LMC
The purpose of this course is to explore, enhance, and expand the participants' competence in
organizational politics. Students will observe political dynamics as they occur in their own
organizations and will interview senior managers in other organizations to learn how political realities
vary from one organization to another. Theoretical ideas about a dimension of organizational politics of
particular interest to each individual participant will be analyzed in a term paper. In addition, each
participant will keep a personal diary of political dynamics in his or her own workplace. The course will
also explore ways to master the political skills of networking, negotiating, influencing, leading, and
following, as well as developing a political strategy.
SM 625. Ethnography of Everyday Life. (L) Prerequisite(s): Course permits for non-DYNM students:
https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/course-permit. DYNM Categories: DE, A; DYNM
Concentration: LMC. Meeting Schedule: 7/15, 16, 23, 30; 8/6.
Ethnography is a fundamental method within the social sciences that concerns the systematic study of
culture. It involves a "thick description" of how people actually live their everyday lives, personal or
professional. Ethnographers study how human groups form institutions and how these structures grow,
function, maintain themselves, and persist. Also at issue is how people share their understandings and
develop ideologies pertaining to these processes. Social negotiation and the development of "local
knowledge" in the culture of interpersonal affairs will be emphasized, particularly as it is transmitted
from one generation to the next. Through direct observation and discussion, students will treat
Philadelphia as an "urban laboratory" and seek to identify, to study, and to learn about local people
and places. In this vein, the class will visit communities and organizational settings to gain exposure to
ordinary people but, particularly, to apply ethnographic methods to the complexities of the modern
workplace as well as to everyday life of the city. The final paper will be a synthesis of ethnographic
literature and observations of local urban life and culture, particularly as these issues apply to
understanding and organization or a local community.

Page 7 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 615. Global PENNovation: The Food-Water-Energy Nexus. (B) Finn.Prerequisite(s): Non-DYNM
students must complete a course permit request: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/
course-permit. DYNM Category: A; DYNM Concentrations: LMC, GL, SD. Course schedule: 1/25,
2/1,13, 22 & 29; 3/19 & 28; 4/9 & 25.
Environmentalist Paul Hawken challenged a class of 2009 college graduates that they would have to
"figure out what it means to be a human being on earth at a time when every living system is
declining, and the rate of decline is accelerating." That theme is at the heart of this course. While we
have seen the notion of sustainability gaining some traction in recent years, our quality of life in the
near future very likely hinges on the development and implementation of sustainable solutions to
enormously complex environmental and social problems. This course is designed to foster the thinking
that is needed to address those enormous problems. It involves focusing on a critical global problem
with sustainability and social dimensions - in this case, the need to balance global food, water, and
energy needs in a manner that allows the world to feed 9.6 billion citizens by 2050 while preserving
the environmentfor future generations. PENNovation is a course about innovation, idea generation,
collaboration, leadership, communication, research, decision- making, sustainability, sustainable
solutions, creative thinking, leading change, and complex problem-solving. Class members take a
deep dive into a major sustainability challenge while also gaining experience in how to lead global
teams.
The nexus: the world faces the imminent challenge of feeding roughly 9.6 billion citizens by 2050, an
increase of about 2.3 billion (31%) from 2015. Yet we are not successfully feeding the global
population today. FAO reports that about 800 million global citizens are hungry, and nearly 2 billion
suffer from micronutrient deficincies. The World Economic Forum reported that global freshwater
demand is expected to exceed current supply by over 40% by 2030-- just 15 years from now--while
evidence of shortages is increasingly clear in heavily populated areas such as California, Sao Paolo,
and China. Demand for energy continues to rise; the International Energy Agency notes that global
energy demand is set to grow by 37% by 2040. An increasingly affluent population is straining the
world's already scarce resources, particularly in end goal of this course will be to produce a worldclass product including the quest for animal protein, yet we continue to waste vast amounts of food
(between 1 and 2 billion tons annually) and exacerbate social and environmentalproblems in the
process. How can the world balance all of these challenges, meeting global needs for food, water, and
energy security while protecting the quality of the environment and preventing social unrest? What
approaches are needed? How can the needed changes be implemented?
In 2016 the PENNovation class will focus on the many challenges and opportunities involved in
balancing the world's food, water, and energy needs. The group will take a systems approach to the
problem, aided by contributions from several thought leaders from business, NGOs, and non-profits in
a unique class format. Our expectation is that the world will benefit from their work. Deliverables can
include: final group apper, a website, an awareness-raising event, a social media campaign, or
presentation.

Page 8 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 617. Economics of Human Behavior and Organizational Life. (L) Handy.Prerequisite(s):
Course permits for non-DYNM students: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/coursepermit. DYNM Category: F; DYNM Concentrations: LMC, SD
As a society, we choose many different ways to organize different aspects of our lives. The institutions
and organization we choose to provide us with the necessities and comforts of life range from the
fundamental institutions of family and religious organizations, to firms in the capitalistic market and
democratically elected governments. We respond to this environment in unique ways: we marry, we
worship, we buy and sell goods and services, and we vote. The primary goal of this course is an
examination of the various aspects of human behavior in the context of organizational and institutional
life from an economic perspective perspective. We recognize that the choices we make are sensitive to
the costs and benefits of different actions and use this economic perspective to gain insights into
social, economic and political behavior in our daily lives. We start the course with an examination of
how micro economists view the world and examine their favorite toolkit. We discuss concepts such as:
efficiency, opportunity cost, marginal analysis, externalities, incentives, free-riding, rent-seeking, and
transaction costs. These concepts are fundamental if an economic perspective and they will be
presented using every day examples.
Before concluding the course, we will look at several topics such as: Human capital and investment
in education (Should you invest in an Ivy League school education?); Law and enforcement (When is it
profitable to break the law?); Bribes and gifts (Quid pro quo?); Economics of information (Used cars
and the market for "lemons"); Why we discriminate against minorities?; Property rights and
externalities (The tragedy of the commons: Should we have smoke-free environments?); and Freeriding (Should I vote in the next election? Should I volunteer to clean up?)
SM 618. Strategic Crowdsourcing and Business Models 2.0. (M) Villarroel. This course will be in a
hybrd in-person and online course.
Crowdsourcing is among the most impactful innovations in organization of the 21st century, enabling
the rise of distributed organizations. In this course, we will learn the radical business models used by a
new generation of companies that transcend the format boundaries of the firm--e.g. Uber, oDesk,
Kickstarter, among hundreds of such distributed organizations. The crowdsourcing economy is rapidly
expanding, with at least 117 distrubuted work companies receiving venture capital in 2013--up from 17
in 2009 and 55 in 2011 (The Economist, 2015).
Entrepreneurs taking this course will understand how crowdsourcing startups made big strides in
the global economy. For example, five-year-old Uber-- founded in 2009--developed operations in more
than 50 countries, reaching sales of $1 billion in 2014. It received $3.3 in venture capital, valued at
more than $41 billion in December 2014 (The Wall Street Journal, 2014). Uber offers an online
platform connecting self-selected drivers and users who use a smartphone app to interact with the
service. Any interested driver, who has a car and a smartphone, can sign up to be an Uber driver.
Managers taking this course will learn why, when, and how crowdsourcing-- as a new organizational
extension of the firm--enables established companies to streamline their traditional business functions.
From making everyday work more efficient, to solving challenging R&D problems, to exploring new
markets. Innovative firms embracing crowdsourcing gain a competitive advantage from engaging with
online crowds who hold valuable resources otherwise not available to "traditional" competing firms-e.g. knowledge (e.g. InnoCentive), services (e.g. oDesk), etc. This course fulfils the following
requirements: Categories: DE, A Concentrations: LMC
Akin to the moving assembly line characteristic of the industrial revolution, crowdsourcing is a
revolution in the organization of knowledge work, which is already changing the fabric of business and
society on a global scale. Through case studies, project work, and online discussion of original
research, this hands-on course provides concepts and frameworks that explain the business models of
a new generation of distributed organizations.

Page 9 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 619. Organizational Project Management. (C) Choukroun.Prerequisite(s): Non-DYNM students
must complete a course permit request form: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/
course-permit. DYNM Categories: F, A; DYNM Concentration: LMC. Course schedule: TBA
The course provides an overview of the concepts, procedures and fundamental processes of project
management for working professionals. Participants are introduced to the principles, tools and
techniques of project management within an integrative framework. The course emphasizes that, for
most organizations, projects are the primary means for implementing strategic initiatives.
Course Objectives: 1) Understand and critically evaluate expectations, procedures and processes of
program management as currently practiced in large for-profit enterprises; 2) Understand the content
and processes and standards of prac tice as defined by the Program Management Institute (PMI); 3)
Understand how to build and manage effective project teams; 4) Become familiar with the critical
components of effective project plans. In addition to the scheduled meeting dates, additional class
activities will be planned between faculty and students.
SM 620. The Coach: Applying Tools and Skills in the Field. (C) Napier. For additional information,
please see our website at: http://www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
Coaching insinuates change, and most meaningful change is, at some level, therapeutic. This course
will explore the dynamics of change as a therapeutic process. Whenever individuals have the nerve to
"help" others, self-understanding must come front and center. As a master coach once said, "Who in
the hell do we think we are helping others unless we are willing to take a very hard look at ourselvesour behavior, our impact, our projections and biases?" Not only must we ask hard questions of
ourselves and resolve our own issues that could corrupt our effectiveness, but we also need to model
the most productive behaviors possible. The questions for students of this course include: 1) Are you
willing to look? 2) Are you willing to be fiercely honest with yourself and with your fellow students? 3)
Are you prepared for the responsibility that goes with mucking around in someone else's life? What
makes this particular coaching course unique is that it affords students the opportunity to experience a
full range of coaching practices in a relatively short amount of time. The expectation is that the
students will have identified a potential client that will be discussed during the first class (although no
firm agreement would have to be reached prior to that time).
The student/coach will be guided each step of the way through the coaching process which will
include a) contracting with the client; b) engaging in a thorough diagnostic exercise for the client
including interviews, observations and a complete 360 feedback cycle, c) analyzing the data, d)
feeding the results back to the client, e) engaging the client in problem solving and an action plan
designed to help increase the client's effectiveness.

Page 10 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 621. Project Portfolio Management. (C) Bayney.Prerequisite(s): Non-DYNM students must
complete a course permit request: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/course-permit.
DYNM Course Category: A; DYNM Course Concentration: LMC
The primary objective of this course is to enable participants to gain a thorough understanding of and
appreciation for the discipline of Project Portfolio Management. Ill-defined and poorly utilized in many
organizations, Portfolio Management has struggled to become inculcated within the fabric of these
cultures without direct intervention and sponsorship from the highest levels of Senior Management.
Beginning with a decidedly strategic focus, the course brings together the very essence of Portfolio
Management--technically robust analytics--with the softer elements of communication and decisionmaking to enable portfolio value maximization. The course is structured in sucha way that it follows a
unique Portfolio Management framework--CREOPMTM-- created by the authors Bayney & Chakravarti
in their book titled Enterprise Project Portfolio Management: Building Competencies For R&D and IT
Investment Success. In each of the first 6 classes, the framework is followed sequentiallyand is then
applied holistically to a case study in the final classes. The impact of risk and uncertainty to the
quantification of project, program, and portfolio value is addressed through classic program and
portfolio optimizationStudents will be expected to apply many of the principles taught in this courseto
their own organizations and to deliver
class presentations that address portfolio strategy, linkages between organizational plans,
decomposing complex decisions, project prioritization, portfolio optimization, and Stage Gate Review
(SGR) processes. In their final paper, students will be presented with a choice of analyzing their
organizations portfolio health or a selected Kellogg School of Management case study in Portfolio
Management using the CREOPMTM framework.
SM 624. Program Management Skills and Systems. (C) Heaslip.Prerequisite(s): Non-DYNM
students must complete a course permit request: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/
course-permit. DYNM Course Category: A; DYNM Course Concentrations: LMC, OC
The objective of Program Leadership Skills is to provide students with an understanding of current
principles and best practices in the maturing field of Program Management. Students will investigate
the relationships between Program Management, Project Management and Portfolio Management as
separate but co-dependent disciplines and examine the importance of each to the successful
achievement of organizational goals. Focusing on Program Management, the course will examine the
unique challenges that are faced when managing organizational activities that principally pursue
strategic goals and that must be responsive both to the outcomes of activities being pursued and
changes in strategic direction. The course will provide a forum for discussing the various types of
Programs that organizations pursue and for understanding how Program Managment best practices
can be applied to each type of Program. The course will explore the need to adapt Program
Management principles in a context-specific way to ensure that Programs deliver their expected
organizational value. Moreover, it will examine how--despite qualitative differences between
Programs--common approaches can be used to assess Program Management maturity and
performance and to define the skills required of a successful Program Leader.
At the conclusion of the course, students will be expected to understand current best practices in
Program Management and to determine how to initiate or improve upon Program Management
practices in their own organizations.
SM 626. Leading the Professional Service Organization. (C) Eldred. For additional information,
please see our website at: http://www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
The purpose of this seminar is to understand appropriate leadership behaviors for professional
services. Students will gain first hand exposure to prominent leaders of diverse service organizations,
and will research how those leaders both develop and deploy their leadership agenda. This course fills
the following Organizational Dynamics requirements: Categories: A Concentrations: LMC

Page 11 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 627. Classics of Organizational Behavior. (C) Barstow. For additional information, please see
our website at: http://www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
The purpose of this seminar is to critique the thought and practice of several "big names" in
organizational behavior, while establishing the continuing relevance of their work to today's
organizations. Federick Taylor (Scientific Management), The Hawthorne Studies (Human Relations),
Kurt Lewin (Group Dynamics), Eric Trist (Socio-Technical Systems) and others will be read in their
primary sources, giving participants the opportunity to form their own opinion of these classic field
studies.
Participants will read primary sources in the field as well as more recent critical scholarship. They
will then present short papers to the class in the model of an academic conference, followed by
discussion. Participants will debate their own views in this conference atmosphere as if both the
founders and their critics were present. In addition to the readings and discussion, participants will
view a taped oral-history interview with Eric Trist and a film of Kurt Lewin's famous experiment on
leadership styles. Each participant will present two brief papers to the class and will submit a longer
final paper.
SM 628. Organizational Diagnosis: Diagnostic Strenths for Effectiveness. (C)
Kaminstein.Prerequisite(s): Course permits for non-DYNM students: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/
graduate/dynamics/course-permit. DYNM Categories: DE, A; DYNM Concentration: LMC
This seminar is designed to help participants learn multiple approaches to diagnosing the complex
ways in which issues and/or problems manifest themselves in organizations. Frequently, when
organizations find themselves in trouble, i.e., there are rumblings in the system about such things as
lack of leadership, poor communication, diminished productivity, low morale, etc., there is a tendency
to frame the problem(s) simplistically and/or locate blame in a few difficult individuals or groups.
However, upon closer examination, problematic issues are often found to be symptomatic and/or
symbolic of multiple issues within the organization. This course will help students understand how
problems which appear at one level of the system (for example, at the personal or interpersonal level)
often represent problems at other levels of the system (e.g., at the group and/or institutional level) or
signify a range of inter-related issues. It will provide students with the theoretical constructs and
application skills necessary for identifying and framing problem areas, collecting data, and organizing
feedback to client systems. Real-time examples will inform our discussions as we consider the
relationships between diagnosis, organizational reflection and appropriate action.
SM 629. Organizational Consulting: Proseminar in Organizational Development. (C)
Starr.Prerequisite(s): Course permits for non-DYNM students: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/
dynamics/course-permit. DYNM Categories: F, DE; DYNM Concentration: LMC
This course describes and examines Organization Development (OD) and Change (OD&C)
competencies through the lens of the guidelines promoted by the worldwide Academy of Management
and professional OD societies such as the OD Network. We read and discuss from the academic and
practice literature how these competencies emerge from models and theories and about how they
"should" be applied. At the same time, OD&C consulting practitioners, theorists, and corporate officers
visit our class to describe how they actually do select and apply their models and their competencies
which include, for example, establishing and managing organizational coaching programs; applying
different OD models in large-scale organization change initiatives; managing change in virtual and
global teams; managing change in cultures outside North America; and using change methodologies
such as Appreciative Inquiry (a blend of positive psychology and systems thinking) to create idealized
development and growth. Students interested in organization development and change, internal or
external management consulting, or how to better manage in their own developing and changing
environments will benefit from this course.

Page 12 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 630. Value-Driven Business Process Management. (A) Kirchmer and Naidoo.Prerequisite(s):
Course permits for non-DYNM students: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/coursepermit. DYNM Category: A; DYNM Concentration: LMC
Business strategies and operations are driven by scores of ever-shifting factors: from demographic
changes and capital availability to technological innovations and increasing regulation. Static business
models are rarely able to keep pace with such dynamic change; and this is why companies need a
management approach that fits to this environment. In effect, they need to know how and when to
modify or enhance their business processes, which processes are optimal candidates for intervention,
and how to move rapidly from business strategy to execution. Business Process Management (BPM)
helps organizations master change successfully and create immediate as well as durable competitive
advantage. BPM has become a management discipline that delivers significant business value. It is
implemented through the "process of process management" that addresses all aspects of the lifecycle
of a business process: design, implementation, executive and controlling of processes.
This seminar discusses how organizations master the "process of processes management" to
achieve the right BPM maturity level to move efficiently and effectively from business strategy to
execution, achieving goals like transparency, agility and compliance, quality and efficiency, internal
integration and external networks. It addresses topics like creating a BPM roadmap, innovation,
process governance and centers of excellence, integration of business and IT, the value-driven use of
process repositories, as well as selected aspects of process automation including the concept of
Service Oriented Architectures (SOA) and the "Enterprise 2.0." In this course framework, approaches,
methods and software for achieving and maintaining a high performance business will be discussed
using real live examples and case studies. Business Process Management (BPM) is introduced as a
holistic management discipline.
SM 638. THE PRACTICE OF ORGANIZATIONAL LEADERSHIP. (M) WING.
This is a practical course designed to help participants engage in reflective practice regarding their
own leadership and their relationship to leadership by others. Students will present for discussion case
material from their workplaces or other settings and we will also explore leadership through in-class
experiential exercises. Foundational readings will provide a common langage and conceptual
framework. Along the way, we will revisitthe fundamental questions : What is leadership? What is good
leadership? What do I intend to do difvferently going forward?

Page 13 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 633. Leadership from the Middle of the Organization. (C) Stankard. For additional information,
please see our website at: http://www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
Durable organizations have learned to encourage innovation from within. This course's objective is to
give Organizational Dynamics graduates the skills andppractical knowledge to organize change and
improvement from a middle position within an existing organization. The course seeks to prepare
students to assumeresponsibility for acting without authority by becoming the leader they have been
looking for. The course's learning objectives are: (a) to gain a working understanding of the pragmatic,
ethical/moral, and cognitive foundations for leading informally from mid organization; (b). to adapt an
existing Leading from the Middle (LftM) process to each student's actual situation; and (c) to carru out
small scale actions in accordance with the process between classes, and in each class to coach
students in learning by doing leadership arts and skills such as negotiating, maximizing the feasibility
of change plans, enlisting and coordinating cooperation on a team, identifying and addressing
stakeholder points of view, maintaining legitimacy of an initiative, and crediting all who help.
Students who take this course should already be concerned about one or more important
opportunities or upsetting challenges in their present or previous organizational surroundings. The
ionstructor will coach the class in functioning as an idealized design team. The design process has two
phases, a base case projection and an idealized design. Phase 1, the base case projection,
formulates the current reality without change, and projects the likely undesired effects and outcomes
of maintaining status quo. Phase 2, idealized design, creates a leadership approach that all
stakeholders would wish for, if all their feasible, sustainable and adaptable wishes could come true
today. By participating in a design process, the class itself models many group dynamics of an actual
LftM situation. Scholarly COmmons describes the work done in this class with examples. (Please see
Stankard, Martin (2011). Guest speakers from earlier years are invited to share experiences with
course content and answer questions. This course fills the following Organizational Dynamics
requirements: Categories: DE, A Concentrations LMC, OC
SM 634. Process Improvement Tools and Strategies. (C) Stankard.Prerequisite(s): Course permit
for non-DYNM students: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/course-permit. DYNM
Categories: DE, A; DYNM Concentration: LMC. Course Schedule: TBA
Process improvement as taught in this course often provides high-leverage, high visibility opportunities
for showcasing coaching and leadership skills as a member, coach or leader of cross-functional
process improvement teams. Cross-functional process improvement teams (running lean and six
sigma projects) have evolved into a major pathway for developing leadership and coaching talent in
such organizations as Baptist Healthcare, Federal Express, Ritz Carlton, Toyota Motor Co, General
Electric and Motorola.
Process improvement project leaders and team members use specific tools and capabilities to
analyze as-is processes and to define and deploy new or improved processes that deliver better
outcomes and customer satisfaction with less non-value added effort. Leading or serving on crossfunctional process improvement teams creates opportunities to work and network with people from
other parts of your organization and creates opportunities for visibility to executives and managers
sponsoring strategic improvements. Participating in or leading process improvement is also a great
leadership, coaching and professional development activity.

Page 14 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 635. Organizational Essentials for Leadership. (L) Choukroun.Prerequisite(s): Course permits
for non-DYNM students: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/course-permit. DYNM
Course Category: F; DYNM Course Concentration: LMC. Course meeting schedule: 6/11 & 25; 7/9, 16,
& 23.
Through presentations by expert speakers, case discussions, and participation in team projects,
students will review and evaluate critical issues from across the frames of business, including general;
human resource; marketing; information and stakeholder management; leadership; corporate culture;
communications; organizational behavior; sales, marketing and public relations; finance and financial
reporting; ethics and social responsibility; unions and government relations; and business law. Each of
these elements will be studied in light of changing environmental conditions, including the economy;
society; consumer behavior; market trends; regulation; politics, unpredictable events such as 9/11;
organizational change; history; and internationalism.
SM 636. 21st Century Leadership Development: Integrating Cultural Influences into Coaching
Practice. (C) Reyes.Prerequisite(s): Course permits for non-DYNM students: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/course-permit. DYNM Course Category: A; DYNM Course
Concentrations: LMC, GL, OC. Meeting Schedule: 6/1, 25, & 26; 7/23 & 24; 8/10.
Coaching has been used to support high-level leadership, to develop high potential talent, to overcome
or remediate deficiencies or unproductive behaviors, and to support or manage performance during
periods of change. As the use of organizational coaching has grown over the last decade, globalization
of the economy has transformed organizational markets, operations, and workforces so that "culture"
routinely influences interpersonal, group, and organizational interfaces. In this context leadership
requires an ability to recognize and leverage the "cultural diversity" inherent in teamwork,
communication, collaboration, conflict, and change. Coaching, as a leadership development practice,
must help leaders grow in their ability to recognize and leverage the national, professional, functional,
and organizational cultures that influence workforce engagement, productivity, satisfaction, and
innovation.
This course is intended for students with an interest in culturally complex leadership and
organizational development. This course has a dual purpose. First, through reading, class discussion,
and written reflection, the course will enhance student understanding of coaching models, methods,
and cases informed by cross-cultural psychology, intercultural communication, anthropology, and
international business disciplines. Secondly, through guided practice, students will develop their skills
in coaching across cultural differences. Students will coach one another through a self-assessment,
development planning process, and initial movement toward their objectives using Rosinski's global
coaching process as one illustrative example of this kind of coaching. This course is a hybrid of online
and in-person meetings on the following schedule: 6/1: In-person and online; 6/25 & 26; 7/23 & 24: Inperson; 8/10: In-person and online.

Page 15 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 637. Creating High-Performing Groups and Teams: A Course in Real-Time Experiential
Learning. (C) Rodney Napier. DYNM Course Category: A; DYNM Course Concentrations: LMC, OC.
Residential course: 8/5 to 8/10.
This course will be offsite in Pennsylvania, August 5th through 10th, 2016. This course will have an
additional course fee to cover lodging and other program logistics. Registration permits will be issued
upon signed Travel Agreement being returned to the Organizational Dynamics program office. This
course is limited to 12 students.
This five-day, offsite program is more about the "how" to develop high performing teams than the
intellectual "what" of such teams. For five days the twelve members will immerse themselves into what
differentiates a high performing team from the dysfunctional teams with which we are familiar. We will
take a deep dive into the fundamentals of any group or team in our efforts to become such a team. We
will, along the way, learn about the art of design --internalizing the skills and tools essential for building
strategic interventions into a team in real time. Not only will we design them, but alsowe will be
critiqued in relation to the quality of our efforts as well as to the facilitation skills we used during the
process.
This course is not for the faint of heart, with participants leaving their names and histories at the
door. We will learn by doing and relate what we learn to both theory and research. Everything done
during hte five days will be "intentional," with a keen eye toward the consequences of our behaviors
and their impact on the evolving team. That will mean long days and an occasional long evening. While
not a walk in the park, it will be full of laughter and personal insights that should have a lasting impact
on the student as leader, far after the program ends. The course is limited to twelve students, and each
must be interviewed to make certain that this experience is what they are ready for. After all, the
course involves dealing with challenging group dynamics and accompanying issues of power and
authority, with dominating personalities; managing differences; building trust; and dealing with the
myriad issues that often drive groups, teams, and meetings into dysfunction.
640. Virtual Collaboration. (C) Reyes.Prerequisite(s): Non-DYNM students must complete a course
permit request: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/course-permit. DYNM Course
Category: A; DYNM Course Concentrations: LMC, GL
NOTE: Logitech ClearChat Headphones and Logitech QuickCam Pro9000 are required for this course.
Please see the syllabus for other requirements. Across the globe companies, both large and small, are
increasingly conducting culturally complex work thorugh tecnnology channels and virtual personnel
transfers, making multi-cultural organization and virtual work inextricably intertwined. In this context
electronically mediated collaboration and communication capabilities across time, distance,
organization, culture, and other knowledge boundaries have become necessary for the everyday work
of telecommuters, virtual teams, remote managers, professional knowledge communities, and
electronic marketplaces.
This course is primarily intended for students with an interest in globally distributed work and
collaborative virtual organizations. The purpose of this elective is to enhance student understandings
of virtual forms of human collaboration and to develop student abilities to work jointly with others via
electronic tools. This course design makes typical social patterns encountered in virtual organizations
visible so that students can learn from participating and collectively reflecting on their course
experiences. This course has an online course fee of $150.

Page 16 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 661. Organizational Culture Change: Theory and Practice. (C) Vanderslice.Prerequisite(s):
Non-DYNM students must complete a course permit request: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/
dynamics/course-permit. DYNM Category: A; DYNM Concentration: LMC. Course Schedule: 1/25 & 30;
2/8 & 20; 3/14 & 5; 4/2.
The importance of organizational culture as a factor that can influence organizational performance
either positively or negatively gained renewed attention beginning in the mid-1990's. The success of
high-profile firms with "quirky cultures" like Ben & Jerry's, the entrepreneurial cultures of high tech
firms that countered the cultures of traditional corporations, a recognition that organizational culture
can be a major factor in organizational performance and the related emergency of "high performance
organizations", acknowledgment that organizational culture can trump the implementation of
organizational strategy, differences in values of workers from different generations, competition among
companies to attract the best employees, and the failure of many once-promising mergers and
acquisitions all pointed to the importance of understanding and intentionally managing organizational
culture.
This course will address many of the major debates about organizational culture as well as provide
students with tools for better assessing and understanding organizational culture and managing
culture change. Course material and discussions will consistently address issues related to both
theory and practice.
SM 650. Outdoor Dynamics. (C) Barstow/Havely. DYNM Course Category: A; DYNM Course
Concentrations: LMC, SD. Travel Course Dates: 8/5 to 8/13.
This course explores the implications of past and future changes in land use and population changes
over time in one of the least densely populated areas of the country, but which serves as both a winter
and summer playground for millions of urban residents each year. Set in the White Mountains of New
Hampshire, only a day's drive for over 10 million Americans, the area boasts some of the most pristine
and exotic microenvironments in the world, left from the last Ice Age. Over 250,000 people visit the
summit of Mt. Washington, the region's highest peak, every year, driving, hiking or riding the cog
railway to the top. The focus of this course is the growing interest in promoting "sustainable
development," which most people envision as protecting the environment and wild species from
human encroachment and pollution. The course will examine the human sphere and the natural
sphere as common ground in the analysis of competing issues; areas of compatibility; and future plans
to promote a sustainable environment in this region. The course will focus on three themes: 1) how the
people and institutions tasked with being the environment's guardians go about their jobs; 2) how the
area is used by visitors; and 3) how industry and its stakeholders have worked with local regulators
and politicians to create jobs and promote growth.
The course will ask students to overlay the principles of sustainability and issues management, in
managing the increasing concern that the trajectory of land use and industrial growth will compromise
the region's native ecology and wilderness and backcountry attractiveness. Left to its own momentum,
how will the future of the area fare versus promoting and implementing more sustainable goals?
Changes in behavior will be needed to bring the two into line, and that leads to organizational
dynamics. How will stakeholders resolve the natural tensions of the institutions' (primarily those that
operate in the region) mission and development goals with outsiders' desires? What leverage do they
and others have in the debate over the future of the region? In addition to an active outdoor week in
the White Mountains, participants will meet with key players and leaders from the area and come away
with a deeper understanding of the major issues in the tentions between "the place no one knew and
the place that got loved to death."

Page 17 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 651. Group Team Dynamics: Understanding the Overt and Covert Dynamics that Support
Effective Work. (C) Kaminstein.Prerequisite(s): Non-DYNM students must complete a course permit
request: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/course-permit. DYNM Categories: DE, A;
DYNM Concentrations: LMC, OC
Although groups and teams are often lauded as the mechanisms that provide the competitive edge for
organizations in today's challenging economic environment, there is often little attention paid to the
deeper social and psychological currents influencing group and team dynamics. Organizational
leaders and facilitators frequently lack an in-depth understanding of how work groups, multifunctional
teams, and cross-national executive groups develop, operate, accomplish their goals--or not--and end.
Team members often struggle to make meaning of the myriad spoken, as well as unexpressed, factors
influencing the process and outcomes of the groups of which they are a part. This course, by
emphasizing both theory and practice, provides students with a thorough grounding in the ways
groups and teams develop and learn. The class will also examine approaches to building group and
team competencies related to effective communication, conflict-resolution, and solving complex
strategic problems as well as ways to manage the range of intentional and more hidden dynamics that
both support and challenge high performance.
The course is designed to include seven 3-hour classroom meetings across the semester and two
extended sessions that will afford students the opportunity to explore various theoretical frameworks.
In addition to drawing on the extensive literature and research in group dynamics and team building,
the class will rely on experiential methods to help students develop keener understanding and insight
into the ways in which their own leadership and followership dynamics, as well as the dynamics of the
group-as-a-whole, influence their team's ability to accomplish its tasks.
SM 653. Coaching Others to Manage Conflict. (C) Napier.Prerequisite(s): Course permits for nonDYNM students: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/course-permit. DYNM Category: A;
DYNM Concentration: OC. Meeting Schedule: 8/27 & 28; 10/1, 2, & 22.
Not a day goes by when you or I, or a person we are coaching, is not faced withsome tantalizing,
challenging conflict. It may be with someone we love, a conflict in a team, a struggle between two
direct reports, a difference with our boss or the challenge of a difficult, perhaps aggresive person in a
meeting we facilitate. The problem is not that there is a conflict. The problem is that most of us have a
very thin, often inadequate repertoire of responses to the conflicts that engage us on a daily basis. The
result is that all too often we are predictable in our responses. Thus, if we take these same limited
skills and attempt to provide them to a client in our role as a coach, the consequences will more than
likely be similar.
This course is about expanding your repertoire of responses to a wide array of conflict situations. In
the process, you will increase your understanding of the theoretical constructs that underlie successful
conflict management. Not only will your strategies for managing a variety of conflicts expand, but you
will be better able to design unique responses that relate to the particular situation with which your
client is faced. How you translate these ideas to your clients and, in the process, provide them the
confidence to use them, will be a central theme throughout the course. There is an attempt to provide
a balance between intellectual theory, skills, and applied strategies along with the time to practice
them.

Page 18 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 655. (GAFL555) Using the Political Process to Effect Organizational Change. (C) Gale and
Brady.Prerequisite(s): Course Permits for non-DYNM students: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/
graduate/dynamics/course-permit. DYNM Category: A; DYNM Concentration: LMC
At one time or another, each of us has said something like, "I know what to do to make some really
effective--and possibly even profitable--changes in this organization,but the politics make it almost
impossible to get anything done." The sense is that, althaough there are changes that should be made
to improve organizational performance, politics (internal, external, governmental) simply obstructs our
ability to make a difference. Frustrations notwithstanding, depending on how it is employed, politics
can be either an impediment or, more importantly, a source of opportunities for improving
organizations. Politics is the art and science of coordinating individuals, departments, management,
markets--the entire organizational environment-to effect a balance between the organization's
objectives and the methods used to achieve them. As with the other factors that are employed to affect
organizational performance-the methods used to improve manufacturing, marketing, sales, finance,
and so on-politics is a means that organizations can use to initiate and maintain critical personal and
institutional relationships
One of the seminar readings--Latimer's "Why Do They Call It Business If It's Mostly Politics?" is
used to provide illustrations of the ambiguous nature of much of what is regarded as organizational
politics. What is critical to understand and appreciate from the outset, however, is that politics is not an
external factor that is imposed on organizations. Politics is not only a means for achieving personal or
institutional power; it is also a method for developing and maintaining personal and institutional
relationships within and among individuals and organizations of all types. This seminar will discuss
organizational politics and the ways that it is used to identify, characterize, and effect change--both
within and among organizations. After reviewing several perspectives on organizations and the roles
that political processes play in decision-making, a series of cases is presented that illustrate the
contexts and conditions for effective political communication and coordination.
SM 656. The New Normal: Racial and Ethnic Diversity in the 21st Century Workplace. (L)
C h a r l e s. Fo r a d d i t i o n a l i n fo r m a t i o n , p l e a s e s e e o u r we b s i t e a t : h t t p : / /
www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
This course examines the social construction of race and ethnicity, including relations within and
across groups, with a particular focus on their implications for organizational culture and management.
In a very real sense, the workplace is a microcosm of the larger society; a place where our individual
experiences, beliefs, and biases related to race and ethnicity intersect, creating both opportunities and
challenges. Our capacity to understand the different backgrounds and experiences that individuals and
groups bring to the organization, as well as recognizing our own biases and the biases of others are
directly implicated in our ability to both manage and be managed in the organizations that we are a
part of. A primary objective in this course is to increase our capacity to first understand the contours of
racial and ethnic diversity in twenty-first century America by investigating (1) the historical context that
influences present-day understandings of racial/ethnic diveristy (2) how and why individuals from
different racial/ethnic backgrounds can "see" the same thing but interpret it very differently, depending
on experience, culture, and social position relative to race/ethnicity (3) the meaning and importance of
dominant and minority groups, the degree to which a racial hierarchy exists, and the implications of
that
hierarchy for important outcomes (4) the degree to which the workplace is, indeed, a microcosm of
the larger society (5) the pitfalls of "colorblindness" (6) the nature of stigma and its workplace
implications and (7) the benefits and drawbacks of affirmative action policy in the workplace.

Page 19 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 666. Systems and Design Thinking. (A) Pourdehnad.Prerequisite(s): Course permits for nonDYNM students: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/course-permit. DYNM Category: F;
DYNM Concentrations: LMC, SD
This class is designed to challenge the traditional thinking of basic management strategy and practice.
Through a series of lectures, interactive cases, and group discussions, faculty will challenge
participants to rethink their assumptions and move beyond the traditional practice of management
strategy formulation and execution. The prevailing pattern of thought employed by management is
analytical. Analysis has come to dominate thought in the western world. But no amount of analysis can
explain systemic interaction and organizational behavior. A new pattern of thought is required:
synthetic. Systems Thinking involves both analysis - to produce knowledge of organizations (systems)
- and synthesis to provide understanding. Without both, effective solutions to problems cannot be
obtained. To go beyond understanding to wisdom requires awareness of the difference between doing
things right (efficiency) and doing the right thing (effectiveness). The better we do the wrong thing, the
more wrong we become. Today a great deal of energy is expended by organizations in an effort to
increase the efficiency with which wrong things are done.
SM 662. Entrepreneurship and Leadership: Creating Winners. (C) Keech.Prerequisite(s): Course
permits for non-DYNM students: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/course-permit.
DYNM Category: A; DYNM Concentrations: LMC, SD
Peter Drucker once famously said that "entrepreneurs innovate." The course looks at how innovation
drives the entrepreneurial process in both large organizations and in startup ventures. It stresses the
importance of bringing entrepreneurial vision and energy to all organizations: profit and non-profit, as
well as government and institutional. The course examines the characteristics of successful
entrepreneurs. Participants will learn how to develop their own entreprenuerial instincts and how to
encourage an entrepreneurial culture in their organizations. The course examines the challenges of
startup ventures and provides practical information to participants who are considering an
entrepreneurial venture. It explores strategies for identifying opportunities, creating successful
business models, valuing a business, raising capital and managing the business.
The course builds understanding of how a culture of entrepreneurhip and innovation are critical to
any organization that wants to survive and prosper in the future. The course discusses how
sustainability is becoming a global force for change, creating exceptional entrepreneurial opportunities.
The course looks closely at the leadership roles of both the CEO in a large organization and the
entrepreneur in a venture. The course examines how leaders in all kinds of organizations set priorities,
identify game-changing opportunities, shape the organizational culture and motivate their teams to
achieve outstanding performance or, sometimes, fail. The course stresses the leadership
responsibilities of the board of directors in providing governance and oversight in both for-profit and
non-profit organizations.

Page 20 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 663. Green Skepticism: Communicating and Implementing Sustainable Business. (C) Heller.
For additional information, please see our website at: http://www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
Green initiatives are creating competitive advantage for businesses. Smart companies are integrating
environmental stewardship into their strategies, operations, marketing, and product innovation.
Companies that successfully embed sustinability in their their core business strategy and culture-rather than "bolting it on" as a peripheral activity - are gaining the most value added. Embedding
sustainability requires the active engagement of all organizational stakeholders, many of whom may
be green skeptics, dubious of the need to change. "Many people who feel passionately about
sustainability cannot relate to those who have a harder time understanding the need for a change..." Corporate associate & MBA candidate. The business case for sustainability has been made many
times, yet skepticism about the need for change remains widespread. While adopting sustainable
business practices must make sense financially, an economic argument alone may not be enough to
convince people to purchase green business products and services or to implement sustainability
practices. The course is based on the assumption that "task significance" is an important factor for
implementing sustainable business practices. This means helping people see the connection between
small tasks they are being asked to do and the big picture of global
sustainable business.The first part of the course focuses on understanding sustainability driven
changes in the global business landscape through a coherent framework. The second part of the
course focuses on what those changes mean for business fundamentals: consumption, production
systems, innovation, and emerging economies. The third part of the course focuses on communicating
and implementing sustaianable business strategies and initiatives. Students will have the opportunity,
with a team, to design a communication and implementation program for an organization. Throughout
the course, strategies and tactics that work to engage skeptics who do not understand the need for
change, as well as tactics that don't work, will be studied. The course is based on the instructor's
experience leading hundreds of business and environmental professionals from skepticism to
enthusiasm for sustainable business over the past decade. This course is designed for everyone
tasked with engaging others in implementing sustainable business practices and for entrepreneurs
selling green business products and services. It will provide strategies for enhancing a technical and
economic sales pitch. The course is also for those who may be skeptical themselves, and want to
reconsider their skepticism. Categories: A Concentrations LMC, SD
SM 664. Organizational Culture and Learning. (C) Barstow. For additional information, please see
our website at: http://www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
What is organizational culture? What is organizational learning? How do organizations learn effectively
and change their culture? A learning organization is skilled at creating, acquiring, and transferring
knowledge, and at modifying its behavior to reflect new knowledge (Garvin, 1993). According to Ray
Stata, Chairman of Analog Devices, "The rate at which individuals and organizations learn may
become the only sustainable competitive advantage." However we define and prioritize organizational
learning, we must still struggle with how to do it. This is a tougher question. The thesis of this seminar
is that an enriched understanding of culture can enhance organizational learning. Participants will
explore the concept of culture, study the work of Chris Argyris, and discover practices and behaviors
that promote organizational learning and culture change. The objective of this seminar is to help
participants get beyond highly abstract philosophy and develop a deeper understanding and useful
skills based on these concepts.
This course will meet on the following Wednesdays: May 27th; June 3rd, 10th, and 17th; July 22nd
and 29th.

Page 21 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 667. Building a Business Case for Sustainability. (C) Barstow. For additional information,
please see our website at: http://www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
What are the systemic changes that an organization must undergo in order to become sustainable?
(Sustainability is defined here to mean that no aspect of business operations is harmful to the planet
or future generations.) We will examine the issues of sustainability using Peter Senge's work on
learning organizations, the Swedish sustainability model, The Natural Step, and Russell Ackoff's
idealized design as our frameworks for building a business case for sustainability within an
organization or department.
Class participants will be asked to build a business case for sustainability within an organization or
department and to prepare an interim progress report (5-7 pages) plus a final paper (15-20 pages)
using the concepts and principles covered in this course and then will present their case to the class in
the last sessions of the course.
SM 669. The Power of Confusion. (C) Stankard.Prerequisite(s): Non-DYNM students must complete
a course permit request: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/course-permit. Corequisite
(s): This course meets on the following Saturdays: January 16 & 30; February 11 & 27; March 12; April
2. DYNM Category: A; DYNM Concentrations: LMC, OC. Course Schedule: 1/16 & 23; 2/11 & 27; 3/12;
4/2
Confusion is a lack of clarity about some situation that matters to you, which causes you to feel so
uncertain or uncomfortable that you have a hard time making decisions. You may be confused about
whether you fit into an organization; or about what owrk makes you feel great versus work that you are
good at or about the right thing to do when you are frightened. The power of confusion is that it forces
you to stop and seek clarity in your life and career. This seminar addresses seven types of personal
and organizational confusion encountered in organizational life during a professional career: 1)
confusion over which personal ethics, skills, and talents you find most meaningful; 2) confusion over
discovering what is really going on in an organization; 3) confusion of who is in charge--leadership and
which direction 'we' are moving toward? 4) confusion over 'what's in it for me?' How motivationand
satisfaction relate to incentives and pay schemes; 5) confusion caused by blaming, rather than
developing skills needed to make lasting changes and improvements; 6) confusion about how teams
pull together 7) confusion caused bycommitting random acts of improvement instead of building a
system for making customer-oriented organizational innovations and improvements.
You were not born with any inherited knowledge or wisdom, yet you are certain to face fear and
confusion during your lifetime. You were born with curiosity and the ability to ask 'why?' when you face
a confusing situation. You were also born with the ability to think for yourself, listen to others, and learn
from experience. Confusion spurs you to use these abilities to gain the clarity that leads to
understanding and wisdom; you will need tools to guide your learning. This seminar will show you how
to use simple tools to achieve that clarity.
SM 676. Communication Competence: Extracting Value in Key Organizational Interactions. (C)
Brian Shapiro. DYNM Course Category: A; DYNM Course Concentrations: LMC
Often an organization can facilitate its own success by employing fundamental communication
practives during value-latent interpersonal interactions. In this course we explore the direct relationship
between competent communication and the ability to extract maximum value in most Key
Organizational Interactions. Starting off on a personal development note and building off time-tested
principles, participants will conduct their own communication skills assessment to determine their own
communication strengths and identify specific areas for improvement. Qualities such as effective
empathy and active listening are also explored. Moving into the organizational realm, together we
define then locate those Key Organizational Interactions, both within and external to the organization,
that significantly impact how that organization is perceived.We explore all the possible value points
within these Key Organizational Interactions, how they tie into the organization's strategic objectives,
and how to best approach them interpersonally.

Page 22 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 671. Workplace Ethics: Ownership, Participation, Productivity. (B) Lamas.Prerequisite(s): NonDYNM students must complete a course permit request form: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/
dynamics/course-permit. DYNM Category: F; DYNM Concentration: LMC
In this course, you will have the opportunity to: 1) examine ethical, religious, legal, technological, and
economic bases for different ownership systems from early human history through the 20th century; 2)
develop a theoretical framework for understanding ownership issues in the contemporary workplace;
3) review social science concerning ownership and the related organizational issues of motivation,
performance, productivity, profitability, culture, diversity, and equity; 4) analyze a variety of cases to
measure ownership's effects across many industries and business situations; 5) learn about various
forms of ownership and compensation in use today in small and large organizations, both public and
private; 6) utilize a diagnostic tool for assessing the ways in which your own organization's culture and
business outcomes are impacted by the firm's ownership system; 7) describe your own experiences of
the different ownership systems with which you may have engaged, including: family, schools, little
leagues and professional sports, volunteer service organizations, charities, religious institutions,
professional service providers (e.g., doctors, lawyers, veterinarians), the places where you shop (e.g.,
think about Genuardi's before and after it was sold to Safeway), and the different places you have
worked...as a way of
systems; 8) assess and refine your views regarding ownership in light of your own social, political,
religious, andethical commitments. Who is going to own what we all have a part in creating? The
history of American business is an evolving answer to the question of ownership. Of all the issues
relevant to organizational dynamics, ownership is arguably the most important and least understood.
Matters of ownership have also been and remain of intimate concern to ordinary Americans-the slave
yearning to be free, the young couple with a dream of home ownership, the entrepreneru who wants to
be his own boss, the consultant who wants to form a partnership with her best friends, and the
indebted, mid-level manager reviewing last year's 401(k) statement.
SM 672. A Systems Approach to Crisis Preparation and Organizational Resilience. (C) Freeman.
For additional information, please see our website at: http://www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
Educational Objectives: 1. Awareness of crisis as a part of life and social systems; macro-level crises
that could affect you; organizational/individual crisis vulnerability; types of organizational crises; group,
family and individual crises. 2. Understanding of: nature and phases of crisis; what to do before, during
and after a crisis; crisis psychology/decision-making; security strategies-anticipation vs. resilience;
Skills, models and practices of resilience; systemic vulnerability/systemic resilience. 3. Enhance ability
to: think critically; develop expertise; adopt a systems perspective; articulate and communicate your
thoughts cogently, concisely and compellingly. 4. Apply course-related knowledge to be able to
successfully foresee and weather crises. General Education Philosophy. This course fills the following
Organizational Dynamics requirements: Categories: A Concentrations: LMC, SD
The course includes travel to New York and the World Trade Center site, and lectures at Columbia
University to understand what can happen during and after a crisis.

Page 23 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 673. Stories in Organizations: Tools for Executive Development. (M) Greco.Prerequisite(s):
Course permits for non-DYNM students: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/coursepermit. DYNM Category: A; DYNM Concentration: LMC
As we all know, living in-and out of- organizations is getting exponentially harder. Things seem to be
multiplying, splintering, and coalescing kaleidosopically, and each of us is increasingly taxed to make
sense of it all let alone create meaning for ourselves and those we manage and care about.
Remarkably, a powerful tool for helping us is one we have already mastered: stories. As humans we
think, feel, speak, listen, explain, and believe in narrative form. Yet this capability is dramataically
under-exploited at work. This course examines a variety of ways to bring the power of stories to
organizational life. We will look at how stories enhance communication, support change, and intensify
learning and development in individuals and organizations, thus informing your leadership style and
effectivness. We will have many opportunities in class to apply "story-based technologies" to issues
you face in personal or professional life. Readings come from the literatures of human deelopment,
narrative psychology, organizational change, executive learning, and, of course, from literature itself.
SM 677. Human Capital and Human Nature: Sources of Creativity and Innovation. (C) Bauer. For
additional information, please see our website at: http://www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
Goal: To mine the resources within yourself, cultivate and engage others, and build with them. Every
one of us is potentially wired for creativity, however, each of us is unique. How can we understand the
research and use it to understand ourselves, our colleagues, and our world? How do we know what is
real?
SM 689. Balance of Power in the Global New Normal. (C) Bauer.Prerequisite(s): Course permits for
non-DYNM students: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/course-permit. DYNM
Category: F; DYNM Concentrations: LMC, GL, SD
The economy is global and every successful business in every nation must operate with awareness of
its place in the interconnected dynamics of local, national, and global issues. This course uses many
lenses, such as history, culture and economy to understand the global issues, their interconnections,
and the impact they may have in different places, on different organizations, and in our personal
decisions. Each of us needs to be able to engage systems thinking as we aim to understand others
from the inside and ourselves from the outside. The ecentral relationship in the global new normal is
the United States and China. The weekly readings begin with recognition of the centrality of a liberal
for the United States and the effect that has on China and the cultures of East Asia. This sets up three
frames of reference: Human Rights, Democracy, and Capitalism. Current and potential Organizational
Dynamics students with interest in Global Studies, particularly those focusing on Systems Thinking,
(Sustainable) Development Policy, and international courses will find this course helpful. MPhil
students with MSOD background can use this course as a foundation for advanced research in Global
Studies.
SM 679. To Thrive Or To Survive? Our Question in the Evolving World. (C) Bauer. DYNM Category:
A; DYNM Concentrations: LMC, GL
The seminar focuses on the implications for our own work and personal lives as we reinvent ourselves,
our organizations, and our society in what is often called "the new normal." We begin with a realistic
exploration of the relationship of the global economy to the widely different political systems which
provide individuals with safety nets. We compare the United States to China and Europe and the ways
in which our different systems both compete and support each other. Each participant will research a
portion of the regional job market, analyzing the source of investments, patents, required skill level and
experience of employees, and competitive outlook. The final presentation and paper will fit their
regional analysis into the global picture. Where does it fit? What are its risks?

Page 24 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 683. Quantitative Project Risk Analysis Methods and Tools. (C) Hornbacher.Prerequisite(s):
Course permits for non-DYNM students: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/dynamics/coursepermit. DYNM Categories: DE, A; DYNM concentrations: LMC, SD. Course Schedule: 9/10, 17; 10/1,
15, 29; 11/5, 19; 12/3, 17. This course will have a software fee, TBA.
DYNM 683 is an unusual opportunity for students to develop a working knowledge and set of skills in a
seminar conducted by an experienced subject-matter whileusing their own Windows PC computers.
Quantitative project risk analysis of cost estimates, critical path networks, and integrated costschedule models is a highly specialized capability that industry and government organizations
increasingly seek to deploy. Sophistocated tools and methods used in this course can be applied
across industry domain boundaries and are scalable from mega projects to volatile start-ups. These
world-class tools and best practiceshave been validated through use in public and private
organizations. (Academic licenses will be provided with the course.) Prospective students need
previous experience using spreadsheet software (an installed version of Microsoft Excel is required).
Also, it is preferable, but not required, for students to have some experience with planning/scheduling
software (for example, Microsoft project or Oracle Primavera P6). Please contact the instructor with
questions and to clarify expectations.
The course is composed of 4 modules, each of which will be approximately two sessions in duration.
Learning objectives are to answer these important questions--How confident are you in achieving your
project's cost and schedule objectives? What can you do to improve your confidence? Will the right
resources be available to implement your responses when needed? Module 1: Develop project plans
with resources and costs during uncertain conditions Module 2: Implement spreadsheet quantitative
cost risk analysis (Monte Carlo simulation) Module 3: Implement Monte Carlo simulation of plans,
CPM schedules, and decision trees Module 4: Integrate cost and schedule risk analysis using Monte
Carlo Simulation.
SM 692. Innovation in Organizations. (C) Freeman. For additional information, please see our
website at: http://www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
Most serious study of innovation has focused on its dynamics and how these dynamics can be
managed. A broader range of studies also consider the nature of creativity and techniques to facilitate
innovation. We survey these areas, emphasizing the relationship between innovation and organization,
which are central to innovation both as facilitators and impediments. More generally, we consider the
process of Organizing Innovation, the role of individuals, teams and organizations in effecting change
and realizing its benefits. I cover one additional theme--improvisation--because it provides insight into
dealing with novel situations, and also as antidote to the relentless organizational and institutional
pressues that crush the "impulsivity" and "deviance" that we need for creativity and innovation. In the
end, though, the core of the course are the real issues of your life and work. Creativity begins with
questions, innovation begins with problems, and education begins with you. Reflect on the central
issues o fyour life and work and ocme prepared to share them with the class. The succe ss of your
experience rests on a willingness to explore your core interests and take a leadership role in molding
the course to meet them. This course fills the following OrganizationalDynamics requirements:
Categories: A Concentrations: LMC, SD
SM 722. Making Meaning from Organizational Experience and Establishing Frameworks for
Consulting and Coaching. (C) JACOBS.Prerequisite(s): This course is for OCEC Cohort members
only. DYNM Category: F; DYNM Concentration: OCEC. Course Schedule: TBA
The cohort will reconvene to collectively "unwrap" the five-day intensive. Using their journals and
observations, participants learn how to apply relevant theory and concepts to make meaning of their
experiences and to analyze and interpret behavior at multiple levels. Then, using their knowledge of
applying theory to practical experience, participants will develop a theory-guided consulting and
coaching framework. Here they research, present and apply a framework of their own choosing.
This course fulfills the following Organizational Dynamics requirements: Categories: A
Concentrations: OCEC

Page 25 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 693. (INTS693) The Global Leader. (C) Taheripour. For additional information, please see our
website at: http://www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
The "Global Leader" is a co-listed INTS/DYNM course, developed as part of the Lauder Institute's new
Global Program that will prepare students for leadership roles in international and culturally diverse
envrionments. The course will focus on deveoping skills through a hands-on approach that includes
using case students, in-class exercises, movie clips, and class discussion, with readings that
emphasize theory and application. The ocurse is comprised of two modules. The first module Globally Capable Leadership - will ingtroduce students to the core qualities of leadership that
transcend culgtures, as well as examine how cultural context influences leadership efficacy. The
second module - Managing Across Borders - will teach students how to negotiate effectively in a
variety of contexts, including conflict resultion,k transactional settings, conflict resultion, and across
borders, such as those of gender, ethnic identity, national culture, and differences in values and
beliefs.
SM 705. Capstone Course. (C) Barstow and Russo. DYNM Course Category: Capstone
This course requires the student to study a topic of their own choice, discuss their progress with the
class in regular meetings and to deliver a final paper that meets the following criteria: (1) Makes an
argument, describes or summarizes a position that is unique, original, or which directly applies to the
student; (2) Uses primary sources or applies to a primary organization as much as possible; (3)
Conforms to the style and format of good academic writing and the MSOD Capstone Presentation
Guidelines; (4) Allows a student to demonstrate competencies gained from the courses completed in
the Organizational Dynamics program.
The role of the capstone professor is to coordinate the development of each student's capstone
committee, to offer facilitation during peer-review discussion discussion of student work as the
capstone is written, and to post the final grade. The course professor may also be the student's
primary advisor,or a reader. For details about the capstone course, including delivery dates, please
see the DYNM Canvas community site.
SM 720. Foundations of Organizational Consulting and Executive Coaching. (C) Russo/Jacobs/
Pennington.Prerequisite(s): This course is for OCEC Cohort members only. DYNM Category: F; DYNM
Concentration: OCEC
This first course in the cohort program of the Organizational Consulting and Executive Coaching
concentration is an introduction to group dynamics, the helping relationship in coaching and
consulting, and the adult development journey. It begins on Thursday night with dinner and runs 8:30
am through dinner on Friday, Saturday, and Sunday, concluding on Monday at noon.
This course is a residential course. This course will have an additional course fee to cover lodging
and other program logistics. Registration permits will be issued upon a signed Travel Agreement being
returned to the Organizational Dynamics program office.
SM 723. Consulting and Coaching Process: Knowing Yourself. (C) Pennington. Corequisite(s): This
course meets on the following weekends: March 19 to 21; April 16 & 17; June 4. DYNM Category: A;
DYNM Concentration: OCEC
Participants learn to be coaches by being coaches to one another. Over a two-month period,cohort
members expand their repertoire of skills and tools, share their experiences, and together scrutinze
the client/coach relationship.

Page 26 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 724. The Coaching and Consulting Process: Tools and Techniques. (C) Russo. DYNM
Category: DE; DYNM Concentration: OCEC. Course Schedule: 1/9 & 10; 2/20 & 21
This course will offer a conceptual comprehension of the tools and techniques used in effective
internal and external organizational consulting engagements. By contrasting the theory and practice of
alternative coaching models, we will build tools and techniques for effective coaching as a leadership
competency. Through an analysis of the coaching relationships in your organization, you will learn to
develop a personalized approach to coaching and expand upon within organizational settings.
Participants learn the "how and why" as well consulting frameworks. Additionally, the relevant and
often symbiotic connection between consulting and coaching will be studied. What process toolsare
most useful to today's executive coach in a consultative environment? How do approaches to
consulting and coaching differ? How are they similar? How can a confluence of coaching and
consulting lead to more effective decision making and wide-scale organizational performance? DYNM
724 will be presented over five class meetings. The class sessions will be taught utilizing
lectureslectures, case studies, structured small group discussions, individual, and team presentations,
faculty and participant experiences, and guest speakers.
SM 725. Interpretation & Problem-Solving & Managing Conflict. (C) Napier. Corequisite(s):
DY N M 7 2 6 . Fo r a d d i t i o n a l i n fo r m a t i o n , p l e a s e s e e o u r we b s i t e a t : h t t p : / /
www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
Participants explore sources of problems and conflicts, identify the range of choices for resolution, and
spend time in the field identifying and resolving conflicts at the personal and team levels.
SM 727. Practicum Experience in Consulting and Coaching. (C) Russo/Napier/Orenstein. For
additional information, please see our website at: http://www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
Participants integrate everything they have learned by contracting with a client to provide consulting/
coaching services. Individual supervision is provided on a weekly basis by a core faculty member and
peer supervision is provided in two clinics, where cohort members share their experiences and
learning with one another and, at the conclusion of the second clinic, bid the cohort farewell as
members are now ready for their internship experiences. This course is open to OCEC students only.
This course fills the following Organizational Dynamics requirements: Categories: A Concentrations:
OCEC
SM 726. Expanding Coaching/Consulting Tools and Skills. Russo/Napier/Orenstein. Corequisite(s):
DY N M 7 2 5 . Fo r a d d i t i o n a l i n fo r m a t i o n , p l e a s e s e e o u r we b s i t e a t : h t t p : / /
www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
Competencies are expanded into more complex aspects of team and organizational change. Having
experienced the art of design at a micro level, they now examine it as a means of enhancing larger
system change. The cohort explores the nature of system change and how it relates to changing
teams and individuals.
SM 729. Executive Coaching Internship. (C) Jacobs/Pennington/Russo. DYNM Category: A; DYNM
Concentration: OCEC
In this course, each participant is exposed to a variety of executive coaching opportunities designed to
enable them to utilize their skills in multiple situations and contexts. Access to an advisor/coach during
this period ensures that each participant's advanced learning will be provided in a timely and
individualized manner.

Page 27 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 730. Capstone Portfolio Preparation and Proposal. (C) Russo/Napier/Orenstein. Corequisite(s):
DY N M 7 2 9 . Fo r a d d i t i o n a l i n fo r m a t i o n , p l e a s e s e e o u r we b s i t e a t : h t t p : / /
www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
In this course, students demonstrate their consulting and coaching mastery and scholarship by
creating their capstone/thesis summary proposal. Throughout the program, participants will have
systematically codified their learning experiences through the delivery and accumulation of various
papers, project results, and other measures of performance. These will be contained in a Personal
Portfolio which includes a record of understanding the assigned literature and classroom-based theory
and experiences. In addition, each individual's personal coaching philosophy is framed in a theoretical
and model developed over the course of the program. Personal reflections and insights are an
essential aspect of the ongoing record of learning. Using all of these as source material, the
participant writes and assembles a full case history drawn from the Practicum (DYNM 727) and the
Internships (DYNM 728 and DYNM 729).
SM 753. China in Transition: The Context and Consequences of Economic Reform and Opening
to the Outside World. (L) deLisle. Corequisite(s): DYNM 754.For additional information, please see
our website at: http://www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
The course will focus on the reforms and international openness that have transformed China during
the last quarter century, and their political, social and legal contexts and consequences. Several
specific topics will receive detailed attention, including reforms to China's economy (including the
creation of a market economy, and changes in enterprise ownership and management and financial
institutions), the role of foreign trade and investment and other channels of external influence, rising
affluence and inequality, political reform and liveralization, and the development of the legal system.
Students will experience contemporary urban China firsthand and see important cultural and historical
sites and artifacts, providing a basis for assessing the influence of Chinese traditions and legacies in
the People's Republic today. In China, we will meet with foreign and Chinese business people,
government officials, academics and others.
SM 754. China in Transition: The Context and Consequences of Economic Reform and Opening
to the Outside World. (L) deLisle. Corequisite(s): DYNM 753.For additional information, please see
our website at: http://www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
The course will focus on the reforms and international openness that have transformed China during
the last quarter century, and their political, social and legal contexts and consequences. Several
specific topics will receive detailed attention, including reforms to China's economy (including the
creation of a market economy, and changes in enterprise ownership and management and financial
institutions), the role of foreign trade and investments and other channels of external influence, rising
affluence and inequality, political reform and liberalization, and the development of the legal system.
Students will experience contemporary urban China firsthand and see important cultural and historical
sites and artifacts, providing a basis for assessing the influence of Chinese traditions and legacies in
the People's Republic today. In China, we will meet with foreign and Chinese business people,
government officials, academics, and others.

Page 28 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
771. Micro-Finance in India: The Past, Present and Future. Handy. For additional information,
please see our website at: http://www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
This 2CU course includes travel and study in Bangalore, Mangalore and Mumbai, India, a country
acknowledged as the world's larget democracy with a population of over 1 billion. India has a thriving
microfinance industry that has come under scrutiny in the past year. While micro finance has been
touted by many as the panacea in helping raise people out of poverty, empower women and aid in
development from the grassroots level, it has come with some serious attendant costs. This course will
discuss a variety of different models of micro finance and review the new trends of financial inclusion
for the poor.
We will start in Bangalore and continue to Mangalore, where we will visit local development projects,
microfinance women's groups, and meet organizational leaders. We will see firsthand how and if micro
finance and financial inclusion "work effectively" to achieve the goals of alleviating poverty. While in
Mangalore, students will attend and participate in a conference: Micro Finance in India: The Past,
Present and Future, being held at Nitte University. We will hear experts speak on current issues and
how new legislation in India may change the face of micro finance. We will end the program in
Mumbai, one of the most populous urban regions in the world and the richest city in India with the
highest GDP of any city in South, West or Central Asia.
SM 758. Sweden: Strategies for Thriving in the 21st Century. (L) Barstow. For additional
information, please see our website at: http://www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
Neutral during WWII, and claiming a "Middle Way" between east and west in the post-war twentieth
century, Sweden - its people, institutions, and culture - has left its mark on our global society. In today's
world, the influence of Swedish ideas and innovations can be seen in government structures, health
and social policies, business organizations, working life, education, science, art, literature, and, of
course, the design and style of many products and services which enjoy high demand. These are
impressive impacts from a nation-state of only eight million people. What lessons are there for
Americans and our institutions as we enter the twenty-first century where our leadership position,
ability to determine the rules and control the agenda of world economic and political affairs are
diminished? In this course, we focus on "the people philosophy" of Sweden, its government,
businesses and organizations. We cover healthcare issues and policy, sustainable development, the
European Community and the human relations issues in organizations.
This course will include meetings with academics and leaders from industry, government, health
care, science, media, arts and culture. Students will meet with and learn from these representatives in
order to explore Swedish organizational dynamics, both in terms of its economic prosperity and the
problems Swedish society faces today.
SM 766. Perspectives on Change in the Czech Republic. (L) Steiner. For additional information,
please see our website at: http://www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
Students will have the opportunity for a brief "professional match" while abroad. Prior to departure, the
domain of professional practice of each student will be identified in order to determine a match with a
person or organization in Prague. A person working in the financial sector or in human resources, for
example, will have an opportunity to spend time with a colleague working in a similar area in the
Czech Republic. Course objectives are: 1) Understand the high points of the previous history, culture
and economics within the region; 2) Understand the routes of the transformation process from an
organizational perspective; 3) Understand how the current changes in the economy, culture, and
structure influence society and the transition to democracy; 4) Appreciate the environments of a major
Central European city and regional towns; 5) Study with representatives of the region's academic,
political, cultural, and business environment in order to compare these processes to those in the U.S.;
6) Demonstrate understanding of the issues presented in this course by writing a final paper.

Page 29 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}
SM 770. Global Communications. (C) STEINER. For additional information, please see our website
at: http://www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
Says an Indian businessman to his American counterpart: "In your country you give money to
politicians before they pass legislation and you call it lobbying. In my country we do so afterwards, and
you call it corruption." This anecdote illustrates well the cultrual relativity of all concepts: what one
society considers a legitimate "profit" is elsewhere "usury" or exploitation. This is the problem faced by
American companies considering expansion into any new foreign market. National identities
expressed through subtle customs, laws, institutions and behaviors are not always obvious, even when
there are no apparent language problems. Understanding the complex regional influences of
geography, history, religion, and culture is key to anticipating how local norms are reflects in market
preferences, social, political and economic institutions, and work attitudes.
This seminar will explore various topics of cultural studies and how they affect values and behavior.
Participants will be encouraged to focus on a specific foreign culture and, through assigned readings,
film, and literature, analyze its various aspects. Alternatively they may develop, either in teams or
individually, a questionnaire about cultural attitudes and carry out a pilot survey in their own
organizations. A significant portion of the course will take place in Montreal, one of North America's
oldest cities, a veritable turnstile of peoples from around the world, whose cultural relations are to
some degree regulated by Canadian multicultural policies.
899. MPhil Capstone Course. Starr. For additional information, please see our website at: http://
www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
This course requires the student to study a topic of their own choice, to discuss their progress with the
class (in regulare meetings) and to deliver a final paper that meets the following criteria: 1) Makes an
argument, describes, or summarizes a position that is unique, original or which directly applies to the
student; 2) Uses primary sources or applies to a primary organization as much as possible; 3)
Conforms to the style and format of good academic writing and the MPhil Capstone Project
presentation standards; 4) Allows a student to demonstrate competencies gained from the courses
completed in the Organizational Dynamics program.
The role of the MPhil Capstone course professor is to coordinate the development of each student's
capstone committee, to offer facilitation during peer-review discussion of student work as the capstone
is written, and to post the final grade. The course professor may also be a student's primary advisor or
a reader. For details about the MPhil capstone course, including delivery dates, see the MPhil
capstone course page.
SM 786. Multi-Organizational Project Management. (M) Choukroun. DYNM Category: A; DYNM
Concentrations: LMC, GL. Travel Course Dates: 5/21 to 5/29.
In the interconnected world of global corporations, studying Project Management from the standpoint
of U.S. firms is not enough. Broadening perspectives is the goal of the seminar in Paris, France. Dr.
Jean-Marc Choukroun will lead Organizational Dynamics students in a study of European approaches
to the challenges of large project management, particularly those involved in public-private and other
multi-group projects. Dr. Choukroun notes that "In today's global economy, managing multi-national,
multi-cultural teams, devising innovative financing arrangements and securing public-private
cooperation are increasingly becoming standard requirements for complex projects. European
integration has made dealing with these issues a priority with many European organizations. Students
will be exposed to new ideas, and new ways of applying time-tested methods and techniques that
European organizations in general, and more specifically French organizations, have developed to
address these issues. Properly adapted, some of these ideas should prove to be readily applicable in
the US context. In addition, students will discover how French managers in the public and private
sectors frame issues, approach problems and implement solutions."
733. SEM CLS ARAB P/P.

Page 30 of 31

ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS
(AS) {DYNM}

Page 31 of 31

