EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
121. BEGINNING FILIPINO II.
131. BEGINNING THAI II. (E)
231. INTERMEDIATE THAI II.

EAST ASIAN NON-LANGUAGE COURSES IN LITERATURE, HISTORY AND
CULTURE
SM 722. (EALC722) ADV CLASSICAL CHINESE II.
L/R 001. Introduction to Chinese Civilization. (A) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Goldin.
Survey of the civilization of China from prehistoric times to 1912.
L/R 002. Introduction to Japanese Civilization. (B) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Staff.
Survey of the civilization of Japan from prehistoric times to the present.
004. (RELS001) Religions of Asia. (C)
007. (HIST005) East Asia: Past and Present. Park.
This course surveys the history of East Asia from early times to the present. We will study the
establishment of various sociopolitical orders and their characteristics alongside major cultural
developments. Covered topics include: state formation and dissolution; the role of ideology and how it
changes; religious beliefs and values; agriculture, commerce, and industry; changing family relations;
responses to imperialism; and East Asia's growing stature in the modern world as well as future
prospects. Although a main focus will be on understanding how the regions we now know as China,
Japan, and Korea emergd with their respective identities, the course will also give attention to various
groups that are rarely noticed in the contemporary world but are nonetheless historically important,
such as the Tibetans, Khitans, Jurchens, Mongols, and Manchus. For students in the University of
Pennsylvania College of Arts and Sciences, the course fulfills the Cross-Cultural Analysis foundational
requirement.
008. (RELS172) East Asian Religions. (A) Cheng H.
This course introduces religious traditions in China, Japan, and Taiwan from ancient to contemporary
times, with emphases on their sociopolitical contexts, visual and material dimensions, and
entanglement with gender, sexuality, and the body. We will examine the history of Confucianism,
Daoism, Buddhism, Shinto, as well as the practices, thoughts, and institutions that do not fall squarely
into those categories. We will pay attention to the relationship between textual and oral traditions, and
that between canons, rituals, and popular practices from both historical and anthropological
perspectives.
L/R 013. (ARTH103, VLST233) Art and Civilization in East Asia. (D) Arts & Letters Sector. All
Classes. Davis,Steinhardt.
Survey of the major artistic traditions of East Asia from Neolithic times through the 18th century. Will
serve as an introduction to upper level lecture courses that deal with the arts and civilizations of China,
Korea, and Japan. Students study and handle objects during weekly session in the Museum.

Page 1 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
L/R 034. (RELS184) What is Taoism?. (A) Goldin.
In this course, we will attempt to answer the question, "What is Daoism?" The bulk of the readings will
consist of English translations of primary texts that have at one time or another been labeled as
"Daoist," in order to sort out the different senses of the term, and consider what common features, if
any, are shared by these influential texts. The course begins with the Laozi, the one text affirmed by
virtually all "Daoist" traditions as foundational. The readings include several other "Daoist" texts,
covering a period of roughly one thousand years, and will conclude with a survey of meditation and
longevity techniques, practices which sometimes have no textual basis whatsoever. Drawing on
various kinds of "Daoist" sources, we hope to answer the question that serves as the title of this
course. No knowledge of Chinese is presumed. Graduate students may not enroll in this course.
041. (HIST096) Late Imperial China. (C) Fei.
From an Eurasian empire ruled by Mongols to an ethnically defined Han Chinese Ming dynasty, then
again to a multi-ethnic empire ruled by a minority group of Manchus, the disruptions and
transformations in the very idea of "China" in the past seven centuries defies our modern notion of
China as a unitary nation with the world's longest continuous cultural tradtion. How to understand the
continuities and discontinuities of the last three imperial dynasties of China will be the central focus of
our survey. How did these different ethnic groups adjust to each other's way of life? Did complicated
cultural interaction prompt different visions of empires? How did the meaning of "Chinese change over
this time period? How did international politics shape the fate of Chinese empires?
With no assumption of prior knowledge, lectures open with an overview of Chinese society before
the eve of the Mongolian invasion, and then trace the changing visions of ethnic and social orders in
the subsequent regimes ruled by three different ethnic groups (Mongolian, Han Chinese, and
Manchurian). We will examine and compare bureaucratic operations, cultural ideals, domestic and
international policies from above as well as the daily life experiences from below. The course will
conclude with an analysis of the collapse of the imperial order at the beginning of the twentieth
century, after it was severely challenged by a semi-Christian Utopian movement from within and global
drug trade imperialist attacks from without.
071. (HIST091) Modern Japanese History. (B) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Dickinson.
This course will survey the major political, economic, social and intellectual trends in the making of
modern Japan. Special emphasis will be given to the turbulent relationship between state and society
from 1800 to the present.
047. (HIST097) China in the 20th Century. (C) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Fei.
From an empire to a republic, from a communism to socialist-style capitalism, few countries have ever
witnessed so much change in a hundred year period as China during the twentieth century. How are
we to make sense out of this seeming chaos? This course will offer an overview of the upheavals that
China has experienced from the late Qing to the Post-Mao era, interspersed that China has
experienced from the late Qing to the Post-Mao era, interspersed with personal perspectives revealed
in primary source readings such as memoirs, novels, and oral accounts. We will start with an analysis
of the painful transition from the last empire, the Qing Dynasty (1644-1911), to a modern nation state,
followed by exploration of a century-long tale of incessant reform and revolution. The survey will focus
on three main themes: 1) the repositioning of China in the new East Asian and world orders; 2) the
emergence of a modern Chinese state and nationalistic identity shaped and reshaped by a series of
cultural crises; and finally 3) the development and transformation of Chinese modernity. Major
historical developments include: the Opium War and drug trade in the age of imperialism, reform and
revolution, the Nationalist regime, Mao's China, the Cultural Revolution, and the ongoing efforts of
post-Mao China to move beyond Communism.
We will conclude with a critical review of the concept of "Greater China" that takes into account
Taiwan, Hong Kong, and the Chinese diaspora in order to attain a more comprehensive understanding
of modern China, however defined, at the end of the last century.

Page 2 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
SM 055. (CINE055) Monsters of Japan. (B) Chance, F.
Godzilla! Mothra! Rodan! Totoro! Pikachu! If you know who they are, join us to discover the deeper
meanings of monstrosity in Japan. If you don't know who they are, learn the literal, metaphorical, and
cinematic implications of these giant (and not so giant) beasts. Watch Tokyo go down in flames, and
discuss what that means for New York and Philadelphia! Explore the history, literature, and films of
Japanese monsters in this undergraduate seminar.
L/R 069. (SOCI389) Japanese Popular Culture. (M) Arts & Letters Sector. All Classes. Staff.
Today, Japanese manga, anime, J-pop, and film have a global audience. But these exports can only be
truly understood in light of longstanding domestic anxieties about sex, violence, gender, and "the kids
these days." More recent concerns about the country's declining birthrate, weakening geopolitical
position, and vulnerability to natural and anthropogenic disaster also deeply influence Japanese media
products. This course explores some of these anxieties through critical examinations of manga, anime,
video games, television, music, and fashion in Japan. Film screenings include work by directors Kon
Satoshi, Otomo Katsuhiro, Takahata Isao, Miyazaki Hayao; Itami Juzo, and Takita Yojiro; manga
excerpts include work by Tezuka Osamu, Urasawa Naoki, and Yazawa Ai. Secondary readings include
scholarship in anthropology, history, sociology, literature, film studies and religious studies.
080. (HIST098) Introduction to Korean Civilization. (C) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Park.
This gateway course surveys the history of Korea from early times to the present. We will study the
establishment of various sociopolitical orders and their characteristics alongside major cultural
developments. Covered topics include: state formation and dissolution; the role of ideology and how it
changes; religious beliefs and values; agriculture, commerce, and industry; changing family relations;
responses to Western imperialism; and Korea's increasing presence in the modern world as well as its
future prospects. Students will also be introduced to various interpretive approaches in the
historiography. No prior knowledge of Korea or Korean language is presumed.
082. (HIST121) Modern Korea. (C) Park.
An examination of Korean society and culture in tumultuous transition, focusing on challenges for the
Choson Dynasty and its reform effort, presures imperialism, impact of Japanese colonial rule, conflict
between two rival regimes, South Korea's emergence as a major player in the international plitical
economy, some salient features of the totalitarian North Korean regime, triumph of democracy, and
Korea's place in the world.
091. (HIST391) Korea: Remembering the Forgotten War. (M) Staff.
Will involve Korean history, diplomatic history, and certainly some military history, in which we consider
the major thrust of the military action: the North Korean attack, MacArthur's landing at Inch'on, battling
the Chinese in the north, the UN retreat, and stalemate along the DMZ. It will also involve a study of
Korean politics, US politics--e.g., the MacArthur vs. Truman-MacArthur controversy; and international
politics--the roles of Stalin and Mao, the role of the war on US servicemen, sand on the Korean civilian
populace. We will look at the war in retrospect--the shaping of an America-Korean relationship, the
Korean Diaspora in America. And of course we will examine it as a war America didn't win.
So "Korea: The Forgotten War Remembered" is a war course insofar as we conceive war as a totally
engulfing social experience that effects the participating nations and societies in ways far deeper than
simply statistics of how many casualties were suffered, how much territory was seized, and the like. It
will address larger issues than simply military strategy and tactics, great generals and poor leadership.
It will seek to capture more broadly the historical significance of the Korean War: it's impact on
Koreans and Americans and the Korean-American relationship, it's role in determining US-China
relations for a generation, and it's place in Cold War history.

Page 3 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
105. (EALC505, HIST395) East Asian Diplomacy. (A) Dickinson.
This course will survey the history of relations among the great powers in East Asia from the sixteenth
century to the present. Special emphasis will be given to regional and global developments from the
perspective of the three principal East Asian states-China, Japan, Korea. We will explore the many
informal, as well as formal, means of diplomacy in East Asia over the past 400 plus years.
SM 114. (EALC514) Literati Arts of East Asia. (M) Chance, F..
What does it mean to be a poet and a painter? How does being a visual artist link to being a literary
person? Americans know the cultures of Asia through such romantic images as The Last Samurai, but
few are familiar with the history of calligraphy, painting, prose and poetry which have dominated the
cultural history of Asia. Using primary texts in translation, this course explores the complex relationship
between poets and painters, intellectual creators and visual artists, over the history of China, Japan,
and Korea, from the beginnings of the civil bureaucracy in China in the first century through the rise of
women as literati artists in Japan. Students will develop analytic skills through discussion of written
texts and painted representations; they will become familiar with a variety of visual artists and forms as
well as with the broad sweep of East Asian history. Background in Asian language and culture is not
required.
115. (EALC515, RELS175) Buddhist Arts of East Asia: Sources, Iconography and Styles. (M)
Chance, F.
Survey of art and architecture created for Buddhist religious purposes in China, Japan, and to a lesser
extent Korea, Tibet, and Central Asia. The course will include a brief overview of Buddhist monuments
in South Asia, study of the iconography of Buddhist images in graphic and sculptural media, and
analysis of a variety of Buddhist styles in painting, sculpture, and architecture.
116. (EALC516) East Asian Gardens. (M) Chance, F.
Explore the beauty of gardens (and associated buildings) in Japan, China, and Korea from ancient
times to the present. Lectures will be illustrated by photographs from dozens of sites in East Asia, and
by a field trip to the Japanese House and Garden in Fairmount Park. The main body of the course will
be a historical survey of the evolution of East Asian garden art forms from the sixth century to the
present. Discussion will touch on geographic and climatic parameters, spiritual and aesthetic
principles, practical limitations and creative innovations of East Asian gardens. There will be an
additional fee for the Japanese House visit, and possibly for other field trips.
118. (EALC518) Gender and Sexuality in Asia. (M) Kano.
This introductory course will deal with issues such as stereotypes of Asian women and men, cultural
construction of femininity and masculinity, international and sexual division of labor, traffic in women in
the sex industries, representation of gender and sexuality in academic scholarship as well as literary
texts and popular culture, local and global activism for the rights of women and sexual minorities.
SM 119. (EALC519) East Asian Ceramics. (M) Chance, F.
History of ceramic forms, techniques, and aesthetic principles in China, Korea, and Japan from
neolithic times to the present century, illustrated by slides and examples, augmented by readings, field
trips, and student presentations. Aimed at students with general interest in Japan and/or ceramics
history; particularly but not exclusively those majoring in Asian and Middle Eastern Studies, East Asian
Area Studies or History of Art; also art majors interested in ceramics.

Page 4 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
122. (EALC522) Chinese Fiction and Drama in Translation. (B) Arts & Letters Sector. All Classes.
Mair.
This course introduces students to some of the great classics of Chinese literature, from the fourth to
the nineteenth centuries. This period saw the blossoming of many new literary forms, and the writing of
some of the most creative and important works of the Chinese tradition (including the novels Journey
to the West, Dream of the Red Chamber, and The Plum in the Golden Vase). We will read tales of
anomalies, transformation texts, adventure stories, historical dramas, romances, and erotic fiction.
There are no prerequisites for this course.
125. (CINE220, EALC525) Cultural Chinas: 20th Century Chinese Literature and Film. (B) Arts &
Letters Sector. All Classes.
This course serves as a thematic introduction to modern Chinese literature and cinema in mainland
China, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and transnational Chinese communities in the twentieth century. By
discussing a wide range of key literary and filmic texts, this class looks into major issues and
discourses in China's century of modernization: enlightenment and revolution, politics and aesthetics,
sentimental education and nationalism, historical trauma and violence, gender and sexuality, social
hygiene and body politics, diaspora and displacement, youth sub-culture and urban imagination.
L/R 127. (ARTH214, ARTH614, EALC527) The Arts of China. (C) Steinhardt. Graduate students may
take this course as EALC 527 and should see the instructor to discuss additional requirements for
graduate credit.
A broad survey of Chinese architecture, sculpture, and painting from the Neolithic age through the
nineteenth century. Topics include excavated material from China's bronze age, Chinese funerary arts,
Buddhist caves and sculpture (including works in the University Museum), the Chinese city, the
Chinese garden, and major masterpieces of Chinese painting.
SM 141. (GSWS233, HIST233, URBS260) Topics in Asian History. (M) Fei.
Topics Vary
151. (CINE151, COML256, EALC551, GSWS257) Contemporary Fiction & Film in Japan. (M) Arts
& Letters Sector. All Classes. Kano.
This course will explore fiction and film in contemporary Japan, from 1945 to the present. Topics will
include literary and cinematic representation of Japan s war experience and post-war reconstruction,
negotiation with Japanese classics, confrontation with the state, and changing ideas of gender and
sexuality. We will explore these and other questions by analyzing texts of various genres, including film
and film scripts, novels, short stories, manga, and academic essays. Class sessions will combine
lectures, discussion, audio-visual materials, and creative as well as analytical writing exercises. The
course is taught in English, although Japanese materials will be made available upon request. No prior
coursework in Japanese literature, culture, or film is required or expected; additional secondary
materials will be available for students taking the course at the 600 level. Writers and film directors
examined may include: Kawabata Yasunari, Hayashi Fumiko, Abe Kobo, Mishima Yukio, Oe
Kenzaburo, Yoshimoto Banana, Ozu Yasujiro, Naruse Mikio, Kurosawa Akira, Imamura Shohei,
Koreeda Hirokazu, and Beat Takeshi.

Page 5 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
152. (EALC552) Love and Loss in Japanese Literary Traditions: In Translation. (A) Arts & Letters
Sector. All Classes. Chance.
How do people make sense of the multiple experiences that the simple words "love" and "loss" imply?
How do they express their thoughts and feelings to one another? In this course, we will explore some
means Japanese culture has found to grapple with these events and sensations. We will also see how
these culturally sanctioned frameworks have shaped the ways Japanese view love and loss. Our
materials will sample the literary tradition of Japan from earliest times to the early modern and even
modern periods. Close readings of a diverse group of texts, including poetry, narrative, theater, and the
related arts of calligraphy, painting, and music will structure our inquiry. The class will take an
expedition to nearby Woodlands Cemetery to experience poetry in nature. By the end of the course,
you should be able to appreciate texts that differ slightly in their value systems, linguistic expressions,
and aesthetic sensibilities from those that you may already know. Among the available project work
that you may select, if you have basic Japanese, is learning to read a literary manga. All shared class
material is in English translation.
153. (EALC553) Loyal Warriors in Japanese Literature. (M) Chance.
From the earliest literature to the latest think piece on Japanese society, the roles of the "warrior" and
of "loyalty" in Japanese culture have fascinated those both inside and outside of Japan. In this course
we will trace the development of paragons of loyalty and warrior prowess from the earliest literary
works, through the epic Tales of the Heike, and on to the "Treasury of Loyal Retainers," theater, and
film. We will read in the philosophy of fidelity and samurai codes to track the growing dedication to
ideals of loyalty, exploring evidence of behavior less than loyal as we seek the real influence of these
notions. Related topics include the extremes of vengeance and fanaticism.
155. (EALC555) Modern Japanese Literature: From Meiji to World War II. (M) Kano.
This course surveys Japanese literature (novels, short stories, poetry, drama, essays) from 1868 to
World War II. The purpose is not only to read some of the most important and interesting literary texts
of this period, but also to reflect on the ways we read and study literature, and how we draw
connections between literature, self, and society. The reading material will be entirely in English.
156. (EALC556) Post World War II and Contemporary Japanese Fiction. (C) Kano.
Who are the most interesting and important writers in today's Japan? What was literature's role in
post-war reconstruction and in Japan's rise as economic super-power? Where can we find the most
complex depiction of shifting ideas about gender and sexuality in modern Japan? Why did novelists
Kawabata Yasunari (1968) and Oe Kenzaburo (1994) win Nobel Prizes in literature? How have
Japanese writers responded to the horrors of war and to the memories of Japan's imperial past? We
explore these and other questions by reading literature of various genres, such as novels, short
stories, plays, film scripts, poetry, manga, as well as academic essays. Class sessions combine
lectures, discussion, use of audio-visual materials and creative as well as analytical writing exercises.
The course is taught in English, with all readings in English-translation.
157. (ARTH213, ARTH613, EALC557) Arts of Japan. (M) Nishimura. Graduate students may take
this course as EALC 557 and should see the instructor to discuss additional requirements for graduate
credit.
This course introduces the major artistic traditions of Japan, from the Neolithic period to the present,
and teaches the fundamental methods of the discipline of art history. Special attention will be given to
the places of ShintM, the impact of Buddhism, and their related architectures and sculptures; the
principles of narrative illustration; the changing roles of aristocratic, monastic, shogunal and merchant
patronage; the formation of the concept of the artist over time; and the transformation of tradition in the
modern age.

Page 6 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
176. (HIST276) Japan: The Age of the Samurai. (C) Spafford.
Who (or what) where the samurai? What does it mean to say that Japan had an "Age of the Samurai"?
In popular imagination, pre-modern Japan has long been associated with its hereditary warrior class.
Countless movies have explored the character and martial prowess of these men. Yet warriors
constituted but a tiny portion of the societies they inhabited and ruled, and historians researching
medieval Japan have turned their attentions to a great range of subjects and to other classes (elite
and commoner alike). This class is designed to acquaint students with the complex and diverse
centuries that have been called the "Age of the Samurai"-roughly, the years between ca. 1110 and
1850. In the course of the semester, we will explore the central themes in the historiography of warrior
society, while introducing some of the defining texts that have shaped our imagination of this age (from
laws to epic poems, from codes of conduct to autobiographies).
L/R 159. (EALC559, PSCI212, PSCI512) Japanese Politics. (M) Staff.
This course examines the politics and policies of contemporary Japan, applying a range of theoretical
perspectives to analyze both recent history and current events. We will survey the core political
institutions of the postwar era, examine patterns of political interaction, and investigate current debates
over policy. The 1990s have been marked by political change at many different levels in Japan and the
course will investigate the significance of these changes, as well as enduring continuities. Recent
changes have included the introduction of a new electoral system, shift from one party rule to coalition
government rule, breaking the bureaucracy, a financial crisis and prolonged economic stagnation. In
the latter part of the course, we will focus in particular on the puzzle of how Japan's political economic
structures and policies could have proven so successful for so long and yet so disastrous of late.
Throughout the course, students will be encouraged to think about Japanese politics in a comparative
context and to consider the functioning of the Japanese political system in the context of more
theoretical debates in political science.
In the latter part of the course, we will focus in particular on the puzzle of how Japan political
economic structures and policies could have proven so successful for long and yet so disastrous of
late. Throughout the course, students will be encto think about Japanese politics in a comparative
context and to consider the functioning of the Japanese political system in the context of more
theoreticaldebates in political science.
160. (EALC560) Introduction to Japanese Thought. (A) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Staff.
This course introduces the major intellectual developments and problems within Japan's history.
Special attention will be given to explaining why and how Japanese thinkers only selectively absorbed
Chinese thinking during Japan's first "opening" to outside influence and then later tried again to be
selective when engaged with the West. Japanese thinkers' differing way of understanding and utilizing
Buddhism, Confucianism, Daoism, Christianity, and European philosophy will be considered. So too,
however, will be what are usually taken to be "native" patterns of thought--viz. Shinto, The National
Learning School, and what came to be called "the Code of the Warrior." Surfacing at various points in
this course will be questions that could be addressed to any nation or people and their intellectual
history--viz. What does it mean for anyone to claim there might be "indigenous" modes of thought and
appreciation? Can thought and philosophy get free of being suspect as ways for the expression of
nationalism in its various forms? What are some of the practical consequences in and for a society,
especially in our "globalized" world, when its intellectual trajectory differs from that of the "West" and
important contemporary thinkers within wish to retain that divergence? Because of its double and
deep interaction with two "alien"
thought modes--that of China and that of the modern West--Japan provides an especially fine venue
for the exploration of such topics.

Page 7 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
166. (EALC566, GSWS186, GSWS586) Gender and Sexuality in Japan. (M) Kano.
This seminar deals with issues such as the cultural and historical constructions of femininity and
masculinity; gendered division of education and labor; representation of gender and sexuality in
literature, theater, and popular culture; and forms of activism for the rights of women and sexual
minorities. This course will use films, videos, and manga, as well as readings from anthropological,
historical, literary, and theoretical texts. All readings will be in English, but Japanese materials will be
available to those interested.
186. (CINE221, EALC586) Screening Modern Korea: Korean Film and Culture. (M) Staff.
Is Korean cinema experiencing a "renaissance" in the 21st century? We will take the recent surge of
success behind Korean cinema as a way to explore our object of study: Korea and the cinema. We
situate Korean cinema in broader (and at times narrow) cultural, social, and aesthetic contexts to
investigate transnational media production and circulation, globalization, consumer culture,
commercialization, Hollywoodization, and construction of national, ethnic, gender identities, etc. The
course focuses on the works of prominent filmmakers of Korea's past and present, such as Shin
Sangok, Im Kwontaek, Kim Kiduk, and Lee Ch'angdong, as well as paying special attention to genres
of Korean film such as the melodrama, slapstick comedy, and erotica. No prerequisites. All films with
English subtitles.
192. (EALC592) Arts of Korea. (B) Chance, F.
The goal of this course is understanding the development of visual, performing, and literary arts in
Korea and the historical, religious, and social contexts in which they flourished. It serves as an
introduction to the arts of Korea, with emphasis on painting, sculpture, ceramics, and architecture and
additional consideration of dance, drama, poetry, and culinary arts. Covers the whole history of Korea,
from prehistoric times to the twenty-first century.
221. (CHIN491, EALC621) First Year Classical Chinese. (A) Mair.
Introduction to the classical written language, beginning with Shadick, First Course in Literary Chinese.
Students with a background in Japanese, Korean, Cantonese, Taiwanese, and other East Asian
languages are welcome; it is not necessary to know Mandarin. The course begins from scratch, and
swiftly but rigorously develops the ability to read a wide variety of classical and semi-classical styles.
Original texts from the 6th century BC to the 20th century AD are studied. This course is taught in
English and there are no prerequisites.
206. (EALC606, GSWS207, GSWS607) Gender and Sexuality in East Asia. (M) Kano.
The course will be a collaborative investigation of some of the most important issues concerning
gender and sexuality in East Asia. The region has in common the legacies of Buddhism and
Confucianism, as well as a process of rapid modernization and industrialization in the last couple of
centuries. They are also bound to each other through cultural ties, colonial experiences, and
international trade. The course assumes that when talking about gender and sexuality, confining our
perspective to one nation-state often makes little sense. Many issues must be considered within the
contexts of historical, cultural, political, and economic exchange. We must also take account of our
own location in a classroom in the United States, and question the ways in which our knowledge about
the lives of women and men in East Asia is constructed, enabled and constrained. To this end, the
course will encourage us to be critical readers of various sources of information: historical materials,
scholarly essays, contemporary journalism, fiction, and film.

Page 8 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
SM 211. (EALC611) Life and Death in Han China. (C) Steinhardt.
Using maps, city-panning, architecture, wall painting, sculpture, and minor arts as evidence, the
course will examine the attitudes toward life and death in Han (206 BCE-AD 220) China.
SM 216. (EALC616) Chinese Art Under the Mongols. (M) Steinhardt.
The Yuan Dynasty (1257-1368), the period of Mongolilan rule, was the only time in Chinese history
when China was part of a larger empire that spanned the Asian continent. Using architecture,
sculpture, painting, and excavated evidence, this course examines the unique results of an
international Asian world centered in China.
222. (CHIN492, EALC622) 1st Year Classical Chin II. (B) Mair.
Continuation of CHIN491 EALC221/621, which is the only prerequisite for this course. Upon
completion of Shadick, readings in a wide selection of texts with Chinese commentaries may be taken
up. These readings are in part chosen to reflect student interest. This is the second half of a year-long
course. Those who enroll must take both semesters.
SM 223. (EALC623) Language, Script and Society in China. (M) Mair.
The Chinese writing system is the only major surviving script in the world that is partially pictoideographic, Egyptian hieroglyphic and Sumero-Akkadian cuneiform having passed out of use about
two millennia ago. Partly because it is so unique, a tremendous number of myths have grown up
around the Chinese script. In an attempt to understand how they really function, this seminar will
examine the nature of the sinographs and their relationship to spoken Sinitic languages, as well as
their implications for society and culture. We will also discuss the artistic and technological aspects of
the Chinese characters and the ongoing efforts to reform and simplify them. The use of sinographs in
other East Asian countries than China will be taken into account. There are no prerequisites for this
class.
SM 224. (EALC624) Urban Culture in Chinese Literature and Film. (M) Staff.
This course examines evolving conceptions of the city in modern Chinese literature and film from late
Qing through the twentieth century up to the present. By discussing key literary and cinematic
representations of major Chinese cities through different historical contexts, the course aims to
understand Chinese modernity as marked by its unique urban sensibilities and configurations. Main
issues considered include space, urban sensibilities and anxieties, historical consciousness, memory
and amnesia, tourism and consumption, coloniality, cosmopolitanism, globalization, etc. We will deal
with urban narratives regarding major cities including Beijing, Shanghai, Chongqing, Hong Kong, and
Taipei.
SM 225. (CINE205, EALC625) Topics in Chinese Cinema. (C) Staff.
This course is an introduction to Chinese cinema in mainland China, Taiwan, and Hong Kong, with
emphasis on the way it represents or negotiates notions of China and Chineseness, as well as
national and cultural identity. We will examine Chinese cinematic traditions in light of significant topics
such as: the foundation of Chinese cinema and the rise of nationalism; film's relationship to literary and
popular cultural discourses; the pursuit of modernization; aesthetic responses to political and historical
upheavals and transformations; the aesthetics of revolution, diaspora and transnationalism; visualized
sexualities, violence, and youth subculture; collective desires to imagine and reinvent the cultural past;
the politics of memory, mourning and amnesia, among others.

Page 9 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
SM 226. (EALC626) East Asian Funerary Arts. (A) Steinhardt.
Study of tombs and tomb decoration of emperors and officials in China, Korea, and Japan from the
pre-Buddhist era through the 19th century.
L/R 227. (ARTH217, ARTH616, EALC627) Chinese Painting. (C) Steinhardt.
Study of Chinese painting and practice from the earliest pictorial representation through the late
twentieth century. Painting styles are analyzed, but themes such as landscape and narrative are
considered with regard to larger social, cultural, and historical issues. The class will pay particular
attention to the construction of the concepts of the "artist" and "art criticism" and their impact on the
field into the present. Visits to study paintings at the University of Pennsylvania Museum and
Philadelphia Museum of Art.
SM 239. (EALC639) Sex and Society in Ancient China. (M) Goldin.
Ancient Chinese writers considered sexual activity to be an essential component of humanity, and the
study of human sexuality to be essential to the study of human history. Sexuality constituted a
fundamental source of imagery and categories that informed the classical Chinese conception of
social, political, and military relationships. This course will survey the major sources dealing with sex
and society in ancient China. There are no prerequisites, and no knowledge of Chinese is presumed.
228. (EALC628) Chinese Wall Painting. (M) Steinhardt.
Survey of mural painting in temples and tombs from the earliest examples in the last BCE centuries
through the Ming dynasty. The course examines paintings that have been uncovered in the last few
years, as well as famous examples in China and in North American museums.
229. (ARCH716, EALC629) Chinese Architecture. (C) Steinhardt. Graduate-level option requires a
20-page paper and permission of the instructor
Survey of Chinese buildings and building technology from the formative period in the second
millennium B.C. through the twentieth century. The course will deal with well-known monuments such
as the Buddhist monasteries of Wutai, imperial palaces in Chang'an and Beijing, the Ming tombs and
the Temple of Heaven, and less frequently studied buildings. Also covered will be the theory and
principles of Chinese construction.
SM 232. (EALC632) Cultural Memory in Contemporary China. (M) Staff.
How is memory constructed and represented? What does society remember and/or forget? How and
under what circumstances? How is it possible and/or impossible to bear witness? This course will
examine notions of individual and collective memories, trauma, catastrophe, historical violence, postsocialist nostalgia, and amnesia, and explore the possibilities and impossibilities of remembering and
forgetting in various forms of representation and cultural production in contemporary Chinesespeaking communities.
SM 240. (EALC640) Early Chinese History. (B) Goldin.
This seminar covers the span of Chinese history from the Bronze Age to the end of the Han dynasty in
A.D. 220. No knowledge of Chinese is presumed, but EALC 001 (Introduction to Chinese Civilization)
is a prerequisite. Graduate students who wish to enroll should meet with the instructor to discuss
additional requirements for graduate credit.

Page 10 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
SM 241. (EALC641) Law in Pre-Modern China. (M) Goldin.
This course, intended for graduate students and advanced undergraduates, offers a survey of the
sources and research problems of pre-modern Chinese law. For reasons to be examined in the
course, traditional Sinological education has neglected law as a legitimate field of inquiry;
consequently, the secondary literature is surprisingly meager. Our readings will take us from the
Warring States Period to the Qing dynasty--an interval of over two millennia--and will cover several
varieties of legal documents, including statutes, handbooks, court records, and theoretical treatises. All
the readings will be in English, and no knowledge of Chinese is presumed. Graduate students should
see the instructor to discuss requirement for graduate credit.
SM 245. (EALC645) Popular Culture in Modern China. (B) Staff.
What constitutes Chinese popular culture in the modern age? How does popular culture contest and
collaborate with modern Chinese literature in the formation of Chinese modernity? This course
provides a comprehensive examination of modern Chinese popular culture in mainland China, Taiwan,
Hong Kong, and other transnational Chinese communities in the past century. From film to literature,
from opera to theatre, from music, vintage photographs, to comic books, this course will probe popular
culture as it has manifested itself in the dynamic dialogue between high art and mass culture, and
trace its sociopolitical, cultural, and aesthetic impact on modern China.
Topics will include the sentimental education through reading popular romance as a new form of
national pastime; the rise of Chinese pictorial journalism; the gender politics of cross-dressing in
Beijing opera as a form of popular entertainment; neo-sensationalism and urban culture in modern
Shanghai; the 1930-40s debate over popular and populist culture; the acoustic modernity of Chinese
popular music; Maoist model operal and revolutionary melodrama; the cult of masculinity in Hong Kong
martial arts fiction and cinema; cultural articulations in post-Maoist Chinese rock music; and the
discourse of violence and body in Chinese youth subculture.
251. (EALC651, JPAN491) Readings in Classical Japanese I. (A) Chance.Prerequisite(s): JPAN 212
or equivalent.
Readings in classical texts drawn from the Heian, Kamakura, Muromachi, and Edo periods.
Introduction to the different styles of classical Japanese, and to classical Japanese as a whole.
252. (EALC652, JPAN492) Readings in Classical Japanese II. (B) Chance, L.Prerequisite(s): JPAN
212.
Readings in classical texts drawn from the Heian, Kamakura, Muromachi, and Edo periods.
Introduction to the different styles of classical Japanese, and to classical Japanese as a whole.
SM 254. (EALC654) War and Literature in Japan: Tales of the Heike. (C) Chance, L.
Our subject is Tale of the Heike, a multifaceted narrative of the twelfth-century battles that brought the
Taira clan down and led to the establishment of Japan's first military government. We will read the
Heike tales with an eye toward how they fictionalize history and idealize certain types, most notably
loyal women and warriors; the development of the warrior tale genre; central aspects of the Japanese
ethos; and later works of literature based on episodes and characters from the Tale of the Heike. All
material is in English translation. (Students of Japanese language may learn to read a famous section
in the original.) There are no pre-requisites.

Page 11 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
SM 263. (EALC663) Topics in Japanese Thought. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): EALC 002 is
recommended.
Course focuses on a few selected topics for close attention. Past topics have included the examination
of certain current social and ethical questions-- for instance those having to do with organ
transplantation, abortion, suicide, euthanasia, political corruption, and "openness" as a society.
Readings will be on contemporary questions but include some pre-modern materials that influence the
discussion.
SM 255. (COML385, EALC655, FOLK485, GSWS254, THAR485) Japanese Theater. (C) Kano.
Japan has one of the richest and most varied theatrical traditions in the world. In this course, we will
examine Japanese theater in historical and comparative contexts. The readings and discussions will
cover all areas of the theatrical experience (script, acting, stage design, costumes, music, audience).
Audio-visual material will be used whenever appropriate and possible. The class will be conducted in
English, with all English materials.
SM 256. (EALC656) The Tale of Genji. (C) Chance, L..
"Crowning masterpiece of Japanese literature," "the world's first novel," "fountainhead of Japanese
literary and aesthetic culture," "a great soap opera in the vein of Jacqueline Susann." Readers over
the centuries have praised the Tale of Genji, the monumental prose tale finished just after the year
1000, in a variety of ways. In this course we will read the latest English translation of Murasaki
Shikibu's work. We will watch as Genji loses his mother at a tender age, is cast out of the royal family,
and begins a quest to fill the void she left. Along the way, Genji's loyalty to all the women he
encounters forges his reputation as the ideal lover. We will consider gender issues in the female
author's portrayal of this rake, and question the changing audience, from bored court women to
censorious monks, from adoring nationalists to comic book adaptors. Study of the tale requires
consideration of poetry, imagery, costume, music, history, religion, theater, political and material
culture, all of which will be components of the course. We will also trace the effect of the tale's many
motifs, from flora and fauna to murderously jealous spirits, on later literature and conceptions of
human emotions. All material is in English translation. There are no prerequisites.
258. (ARCH718, EALC658) Japanese Architecture. (M) Steinhardt.
An introduction to the visual, aesthetic, historical, religious, philosophical, and symbolic aspects of
Japanese structures from earliest times to the mid-19th century. Through a discussion of shrines,
temples, palaces, tombs, cities, and gardens the student will explore what makes Japanese
architecture distinctive and how the traditions of Japanese architecture evolve over time.
265. (EALC665) Zen Buddhism. (M) Staff. Lectures and discussion.
This course examines the history, doctrines, and practices of Zen Buddhism in China, Japan and the
West. Topics include the monastic life, notable Zen masters, Zen's cultural impact, and enlightenment.
SM 269. (EALC669, RELS489) Japanese Buddhism. (C) Staff.
An introduction to the history and cultural role of Buddhism in Japan. Emphasis is on Buddhism as a
component in the religious, intellectual, and cultural life of the Japanese, especially in poetry and the
visual arts. Includes a short review of prior Buddhism in India and China.

Page 12 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
279. (EALC679) Contemporary Japanese Society. (M) Staff. No background is necessary, although
EALC 002 is desirable.
The course will cover a number of social issues in Japan today. Since so much of postwar Japanese
development has been based upon the nature of the relationship between the United States and
Japan, we will begin with a consideration of the occupation of Japan as the crucible in which the
partnership was formed and basic agreements reached. We will examine the nature of the Japanese
political economy, both the extraordinary growth of the economy until the late 1980s and its post-cold
war stagnation. Among the social issues we will examine are ethnic consciousness, marriage and the
family, work and gender roles, school and education. We will conclude with a consideration of Japan's
imperialist role in the prewar and wartime era.
SM 291. (EALC691) Archaeology of Central Asia. (C) Steinhardt.
A site by site investigation of Buddhist and non-Buddhist ruins in Central Asia. Included are Nisa,
Khwarezm, Pyandzhikent, Khalchayan, Ay-Khanum, Bamiyan, Miran, Tumshuk, Kizil, Kucha, Khotan,
Adzhina-Tepe, Khocho, Khara-Khoto, and Bezeklik.
SM 301. Major Seminar on China. (C) Mair.Prerequisite(s): EALC001,no language required for
undergraduates.
Fall 2016;Silk Road: This course will examine the full extent of the so-called Silk Road, from the
prehistoric period up to the Mongol period (ca. 13th c.). The primary focus, however, will be on the
Tarim Basin in Eastern Central Asia during the Bronze Age and Early Iron Age. It was here and during
this period that the famous Caucasoid/Europoid mummies were discovered during the 20th century. All
aspects of the mummies will be studied, from physical anthropology to genetics, from language to
textiles, from burials to lifestyles, from religion to art. The question of what happened to the mumy
people will also be raised, as will who their successors were after they disappeared.
SM 302. Major Seminar on Japan. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): EALC 002. No language required for
undergraduates.
This is a seminar required for all Japanese majors in the Department of East Asian Languages and
Civilization. Topic varies year to year.
SM 501. Chinese History and Civilization. (M) Staff.
This Master's level seminar focuses on the political, social and cultural history of the Chinese region
from the Stone Age to the 20th century. Readings will consist of primary and secondary sources,
including influential modern studies of Chinese history and civilization. All course materials are in
English and no knowledge of Chinese is presumed.
515. (EALC115, RELS175) Buddhist Arts of East Asia: Sources, Iconography and Styles. (M)
Chance, F.Prerequisite(s): Research in an East Asian language required for graduate credit.
Survey of art and architecture created for Buddhist religious purposes in China, Japan, and to a lesser
extent Korea, Tibet, and Central Asia. The course will include a brief overview of Buddhist monuments
in South Asia, study of the iconography of Buddhist images in graphic and sculptural media, and
analysis of a variety of Buddhist styles in painting, sculpture, and architecture.

Page 13 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
503. (EALC103, HIST003, HIST403) Asia in a Wider World. (A) Waldron.
Integrated introduction to the history of Asia from the middle ages to early modern times (roughly
1100-1800), including China, Japan, Korea, and Southeast Asia, and the great empires of Genghis
Khan, Tamerlane, and the Turks, during the period of transition from cosmopolitan empires to nationstates. Presumes no prior knowledge. Emphasis is on Asia's place in world history, with basic
narrative, consideration of connections through trade, navigation, and migration; examination of
warfare and military technology, and comparisons of social, religious, cultural and identity structures.
Substantial attention is also paid to Russia, India, and the Middle East, and to relations with Europe.
Readings include translated primary sources.
505. (EALC105, HIST395) East Asian Diplomacy. (A) Dickinson.
This course will survey recent scholarship on East Asian diplomacy from the sixteenth century to the
present. We will engage several fundamental debates about the relationship between China, Japan,
Korea and the outer world and introduce not only orthodox diplomatic analyses but also newer
approaches to modern China, Japan and Korea by international and global historians.
SM 514. (EALC114) Literati Arts of East Asia. (M) Chance, F..
What does it mean to be a poet and a painter? How does being a visual artist link to being a literary
person? Americans know the cultures of Asia through such romantic images as The Last Samurai, but
few are familiar with the history of calligraphy, painting, prose and poetry which have dominated the
cultural history of Asia. Using primary texts in translation, this course explores the complex relationship
between poets and painters, intellectual creators and visual artists, over the history of China, Japan,
and Korea, from the beginnings of the civil bureaucracy in China in the first century through the rise of
women as literati artists in Japan. Students will develop analytic skills through discussion of written
texts and painted representations; they will become familiar with a variety of visual artists and forms as
well as with the broad sweep of East Asian history. Background inAsian language and culture is not
required.
516. (EALC116) East Asian Gardens. (M) Chance, F.
Explore the beauty of gardens (and associated buildings) in Japan, China, and Korea from ancient
times to the present. Lectures will be illustrated by photographs from dozens of sites in East Asia, and
by a field trip to the Japanese House and Garden in Fairmount Park. The main body of the course will
be a historical survey of the evolution of East Asian garden art forms from the sixth century to the
present. Discussion will touch on geographic and climatic parameters, spiritual and aesthetic
principles, practical limitations and creative innovations of East Asian gardens. There will be an
additional fee for the Japanese House visit, and possibly for other field trips.
518. (EALC118) Gender and Sexuality in Asia. (M) Kano.
This introductory course will deal with issues such as stereotypes of Asian women and men, cultural
construction of femininity and masculinity, international and sexual division of labor, traffic in women in
the sex industries, representation of gender and sexuality in academic scholarship as well as literary
texts and popular culture, local and global activism for the rights of women and sexual minorities.
SM 519. (EALC119) East Asian Ceramics. (M) Chance, F.
History of ceramic forms, techniques, and aesthetic principles in China, Korea, and Japan from
neolithic times to the present century, illustrated by slides and examples, augmented by readings, field
trips, and student presentations. Aimed at students with general interest in Japan and/or ceramics
history; particularly but not exclusively those majoring in East Asian Languages & Civs, East Asian
Area Studies or History of Art; also art majors interested in ceramics.

Page 14 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
521. (EALC121) Chinese Poetry & Prose: In translation. (A) Mair.
A wide variety of poetic & prose genres from the earliest times to the 19th century is introduced
through English translation. A few selections will also be studied in Chinese characters with romanized
transcriptions. There are no prerequisites for this course.
522. (EALC122) Chinese Fiction and Drama in Translation. (B) Mair.
This course introduces students to some of the great classics of Chinese literature, from the fourth to
the nineteenth centuries. This period saw the blossoming of many new literary forms, and the writing of
some of the most creative and important works of the Chinese tradition (including the novels Journey
to the West, Dream of the Red Chamber, and The Plum in the Golden Vase). We will read tales of
anomalies, transformation texts, adventure stories, historical dramas, romances, and erotic fiction.
There are no prerequisites for this course.
525. (EALC125) Cultural Chinas: 20th Century Chinese Literature and Film. (B) Staff.
This course serves as a thematic introduction to modern Chinese literature and cinema in mainland
China, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and transnational Chinese communities in the twentieth century. By
discussing a wide range of key literary and filmic texts, this class looks into major issues and
discourses in China's century of modernization: enlightenment and revolution, politics and aesthetics,
sentimental education and nationalism, historical trauma and violence, gender and sexuality, social
hygiene and body politics, diaspora and displacement, youth sub-culture and urban imagination.
552. (EALC152) Love and Loss in Japanese Literary Traditions: In Translation. (A) Chance.
How do people make sense of the multiple experiences that the simple words "love" and "loss" imply?
How do they express their thoughts and feelings to one another? In this course, we will explore some
means Japanese culture has found to grapple with these events and sensations. We will also see how
these culturally sanctioned frameworks have shaped the ways Japanese view love and loss. Our
materials will sample the literary tradition of Japan from earliest times to the early modern and even
modern periods. Close readings of a diverse group of texts, including poetry, narrative, theater, and the
related arts of calligraphy, painting, and music will structure our inquiry. The class will take an
expedition to nearby Woodlands Cemetery to experience poetry in nature. By the end of the course,
you should be able to appreciate texts that differ slightly in their value systems, linguistic expressions,
an. aesthetic sensibilities from those that you may already know. Among the available project work that
you may select, if you have basic Japanese, is learning to read a literary manga. All shared class
material is in English translation.
L/R 527. (ARTH214, ARTH614, EALC127) The Arts of China. (C) Staff.
A broad survey of Chinese architecture, sculpture, and painting from the Neolithic age through the
nineteenth century. Topics include excavated material from China's bronze age, Chinese funerary arts,
Buddhist caves and sculpture (including works in the University Museum), the Chinese city, the
Chinese garden, and major masterpieces of Chinese painting.
531. (EALC131) Introduction to Classical Chinese Thought. (K) Goldin.
This course is intended as an introduction to the foundational thinkers of Chinese civilization, who
flourished from the fifth to the second centuries B.C. No knowledge of Chinese is presumed, and there
are no prerequisites, although EALC 001 (Introduction to Chinese Civilization) is recommended.
Graduate students may take this course as EALC 531 and should see the instructor to discuss
requirements for graduate credit. (Undergraduates must enroll in the course as EALC 131.)

Page 15 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
551. (CINE151, COML256, EALC151, GSWS257) Contemporary Fiction & Film in Japan. (M)
Kano.Prerequisite(s): This course will explore fiction and film in contemporary Japan, from 1945 to the
present. Topics will include literary and cinematic representation of Japan s war experience and postwar reconstruction, negotiation with Japanese classics, confrontation with the state, and changing
ideas of gender and sexuality. We will explore these and other questions by analyzing texts of various
genres, including film and film scripts, novels, short stories, manga, and academic essays. Class
sessions will combine lectures, discussion, audio-visual materials, and creative as well as analytical
writing exercises. The course is taught in English, although Japanese materials will be made available
upon request. No prior coursework in Japanese literature, culture, or film is required or expected;
additional secondary materials will be available for students taking the course at the 600 level. Writers
and film directors examined may include: Kawabata Yasunari, Hayashi Fumiko, Abe Kobo, Mishima
Yukio.
553. (EALC153) Loyal Warriors in Japanese Literature. (M) Chance.
From the earliest literature to the latest think piece on Japanese society, the roles of the "warrior" and
of "loyalty" in Japanese culture have fascinated those both inside and outside of Japan. In this course
we will trace the development of paragons of loyalty and warrior prowess from the earliest literary
works, through the epic Tales of the Heike, and on to the "Treasury of Loyal Retainers." We will read in
the philosophy of fidelity and samurai codes to track the growing dedication to ideals of loyalty,
exploring evidence of behavior less than loyal as we seek the real influence of these notions. Related
topics will include the extremes of vengeance and fanaticism.
555. (EALC155) Modern Japanese Literature: From Meiji to World War II. (A) Kano.
This course surveys Japanese literature (novels, short stories, poetry, drama, essays) from 1868 to
World War II. The purpose is not only to read some of the most important and interesting literary texts
of this period, but also to reflect on the ways we read and study literature, and how we draw
connections between literature, self, and society. The reading material will be entirely in English.
556. (EALC156) Post World War II and Contemporary Japanese Fiction. (C) Kano.
Who are the most interesting and important writers in today's Japan? What was literature's role in
post-war reconstruction and in Japan's rise as economic super-power? Where can we find the most
complex depiction of shifting ideas about gender and sexuality in modern Japan? Why did novelists
Kawabata Yasunari (1968) and Oe Kenzaburo (1994) win Nobel Prizes in literature? How have
Japanese writers responded to the horrors of war and to the memories of Japan's imperial past? We
explore these and other questions by reading literature of various genres, such as novels, short
stories, plays, film scripts, poetry, manga, as well as academic essays. Class sessions combine
lectures, discussion, use of audio-visual materials and creative as well as analytical writing excercises.
The course is taught in English, with all readings in English-translation.
557. (ARTH213, ARTH613, EALC157) Arts of Japan. (C) Nishimura.
This is an introductory survey course on the ancient societies and civilizations of East Asia especially
in the areas known today as Japan, China,Korea. This course will explore the general lifeways of the
peoples in these regions during the prehistoric periods, specifically from the Mesolithic/Neolithic
periods about 8,000 BC up to the era of political unification around 700 AD in both the Japanese
archipelago and the Korean peninsula. By examining primarily the art and architecture of these
prehistoric societies, this course will explore important sociocultural aspects, including subsistence,
sedentism, state formation, social stratification, leadership, warfare, trade, technology, population
movement, and morturary customs. The course aims to provide a through foundation for further study
in the histories and cultures of ancient Japan, China and Korea.

Page 16 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
576. (EALC176) Japan: Age of the Samurai. (C) Staff.
This course deals with the samurai in Japanese history and culture and will focus on the period of
samurai political dominance from 1185 to 1868, but it will in fact range over the whole of Japanese
history from the development of early forms of warfare to the disappearance of the samurai after the
Meiji Restoration of the 19th century. The course will conclude with a discussion of the legacy of the
samurai in modern Japanese culture and the image of the samurai in foreign perceptions of Japan.
L/R 559. (EALC159, PSCI212, PSCI512) Japanese Politics. (M) Staff.
This course examines the politics and policies of contemporary Japan, applying a range of theoretical
perspectives to analyze both recent history and current events. We will survey the core political
institutions of the postwar era, examine patterns of political interaction, and investigate current debates
over policy. The 1990s have been marked by political change at many different levels in Japan and the
course will investigate the significance of these changes, as well as enduring continuities. Recent
changes have included the introduction of a new electoral system, shift from one party rule to coalition
government rule, breaking the bureaucracy, a financial crisis and prolonged economic stagnation. In
the latter part of the course, we will focus in particular on the puzzle of how Japan's political economic
structures and policies could have proven so successful for so long and yet so distastrous of late.
Throughout the course, students will be encouraged to think about Japanese politics in a comparative
context and to consider the functioning of the Japanese political system in the context of more
theoretical debates in political science.
560. (EALC160) Introduction to Japanese Thought. (A) Staff.
This course introduces the major intellectual developments and problems within Japan's history.
Special attention will be given to explaining why and how Japanese thinkers only selectively absorbed
Chinese thinking during Japan's first "opening" to outside influence and then later tried again to be
selective when engaged with the West. Japanese thinkers' differing way of understanding and utilizing
Buddhism, Confucianism, Daoism, Christianity, and European philosophy will be considered. So too,
however, will be what are usually taken to be "native" patterns of thought--viz. Shinto, The National
Learning School, and what came to be called "the Code of the Warrior." Surfacing at various points in
this course will be questions that could be addressed to any nation or people and their intellectual
history--viz. What does it mean for anyone to claim there might be "indigenous" modes of thought and
appreciation? Can thought and philosophy get free of being suspect as ways for the expression of
nationalism in its various forms? What are some of the practical consequences in and for a society,
especially in our "globalized" world, when its intellectual trajectory differs from that of the "West" and
important contemporary thinkers within wish to retain that
divergence? Because of its double and deep interaction with two "alien" thought modes--that of
China and that of the modern West--Japan provides an especially fine venue for the exploration of
such topics.
566. (EALC166, GSWS186, GSWS586) Gender and Sexuality in Japan. (M) Kano.
This seminar deals with issues such as the cultural and historical constructions of femininity and
masculinity; gendered division of education and labor; representation of gender and sexuality in
literature, theater, and popular culture; and forms of activism for the rights of women and sexual
minorities. This course will use films, videos, and manga, as well as readings from anthropological,
historical, literary, and theoretical texts. All readings will be in English, but Japanese materials will be
available to those interested.

Page 17 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
586. (CINE221, EALC186) Screening Modern Korea: Korean Film and Culture. (M) Kim.
Is Korean cinema experiencing a "renaissance" in the 21st century? We will take the recent surge of
success behind Korean cinema as a way to explore our object of study: Korea and the cinema. We
situate Korean cinema in broader (and at times narrow) cultural, social, and aesthetic contexts to
investigate transnational media production and circulation, globalization, consumer culture,
commercialization, Hollywoodization, and construction of national, ethnic, gender identities, etc. The
course focuses on the works of prominent filmmakers of Korea's past and present, such as Shin
Sangok, Im Kwontaek, Kim Kiduk, and Lee Ch'angdong, as well as paying special attention to genres
of Korean film such as the melodrama, slapstick comedy, and erotica. No prerequisites. All films with
English subtitles.
Special attention to genres of Korean film such as the melodrama, slapstick comedy, and erotica.
No prerequisites. All films with English subtitles.
592. (EALC192) Arts of Korea. (B) Chance, F.
The goal of this course is understanding the development of visual, performing, and literary arts in
Korea and the historical, religious, and social contexts in which they flourished. It serves as an
introduction to the arts of Korea, with emphasis on painting, sculpture, ceramics, and architecture and
additional consideration of dance, drama, poetry, and culinary arts. Covers the whole history of Korea,
from prehistoric times to the twenty-first century. Students enrolled in this graduate number are
expected to do research in an east asian language.
SM 611. (EALC211) Life and Death in Han China. (C) Steinhardt.
Using wall painting, sculpture, and minor arts as evidence, the course will examine the attitudes
toward life and beliefs and death in Han (206 B.C.-A.D.220) China.
SM 616. (EALC216) Chinese Arts Under the Mongols. (M) Steinhardt.
The Yuan Dynasty (1257-1368), the period of Mongolilan rule, was the only time in Chinese history
when China was part of a larger empire that spanned the Asian continent. Using architecture,
sculpture, painting, and excavated evidence, this course examines the unique results of an
international Asian world centered in China.
SM 624. (EALC224) Urban Culture in Chinese Literature and Film. (M) Staff.
This course examines evolving conceptions of the city in modern Chinese literature and film from late
Qing through the twentieth century up to the present. By discussing key literary and cinematic
representations of major Chinese cities through different historical contexts, the course aims to
understand Chinese modernity as marked by its unique urban sensibilities and configurations. Main
issues considered include space, urban sensibilities and anxieties, historical consciousness, memory
and amnesia, tourism and consumption, coloniality, cosmopolitanism, globalization, etc. We will deal
with urban narratives regarding major cities including Beijing, Shanghai, Chongqing, Hong Kong, and
Taipei.

Page 18 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
SM 623. (EALC223) Language, Script and Society in China. (M) Mair.
The Chinese writing system is the only major surviving script in the world that is partially pictoideographic, Egyptian hieroglyphic and Sumero-Akkadian cuneiform having passed out of use about
two millennia ago. Partly because it is so unique, a tremendous number of myths have grown up
around the Chinese script. In an attempt to understand how they really function, this seminar will
examine the nature of the sinographs and their relationship to spoken Sinitic languages, as well as
their implications for society and culture. We will also discuss the artistic and technological aspects of
the Chinese characters and the ongoing efforts to reform and simplify them. The use of sinographs in
other East Asian countries than China will be taken into account. There are no prerequisites for this
class.
SM 626. (EALC226) East Asian Funerary Arts. (A) Steinhardt.
Study of tombs and tomb decoration of emperors and officials in China, Korea, and Japan from the
pre-Buddhist era through the l9th century.
L/R 627. (ARTH217, ARTH616, EALC227) Chinese Painting. (C) Steinhardt.
Study of Chinese painting and practice from the earliest pictorial representation through the late
twentieth century. Painting styles are analyzed, but themes such as landscape and narrative are
considered with regard to larger social, cultural, and historical issues. The class will pay particular
attention to the construction of the concepts of the "artist" and "art criticism" and their impact on the
field into the present. Visits to study paintings at the University of Pennsylvania Museum and
Philadelphia Museum of Art.
628. (EALC228) Chinese Wall Painting. (M) Steinhardt.
Survey of mural painting in temples and tombs from the earliest exampls in the last BCE centuries
through the Ming dynasty. The course examines paintings that have been uncovered in the last few
years, as well as famous examples in China and in North American museums.
629. (ARCH716, EALC229) Chinese Architecture. (C) Steinhardt.
Survey of Chinese buildings and building technology from the formative period in the second
millennium B.C. through the twentieth century. The course will deal with well-known monuments such
as the Buddhist monasteries of Wutai, imperial palaces in Chang'an and Beijing, the Ming tombs and
the Temple of Heaven, and less frequently studied buildings. Also covered will be the theory and
principles of Chinese construction.
SM 632. (EALC232) Cultural Memory in Contemporary China. (M) Staff.
How is memory constructed and represented? What does society remember and/or forget? How and
under what circumstances? How is it possible and/or impossible to bear witness? This course will
examine notions of individual and collective memories, trauma, catastrophe, historical violence, postsocialist nostalgia, and amnesia, and explore the possibilities and impossibilities of remembering and
forgetting in various forms of representation and cultural production in contemporary Chinesespeaking communities.

Page 19 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
SM 639. (EALC239) Sex and Society in Ancient China. (M) Goldin.
Ancient Chinese writers considered sexual activity to be an essential component of humanity, and that
study of human sexuality to be essential to the study of human history. Sexuality constituted a
fundamental source of imagery and categories that informed the classical Chinese conception of
social, political, and military relationships. This course will survey the major sources dealing with sex
and society in ancient China. There are no pre-requisites, and no knowledge of Chinese is presumed.
SM 640. (EALC240) Early Chinese History. (B) Goldin.
This seminar covers the span of Chinese history from the Bronze Age to the establishment of the
empire in 221 B.C. No knowledge of Chinese is presumed, but EALC 001 (Introduction to Chinese
Civilization) is a prerequisite. Graduate students who wish to enroll should meet with the instructor to
discuss additional requirements for graduate credit.
SM 641. (EALC241) Law in Pre-Modern China. (M) Goldin.
This course, intended for graduate students and advanced undergraduates, offers a survey of the
sources and research problems of pre-modern Chinese law. For reasons to be examined in the
course, traditional Sinological education has neglected law as a legitimate field of inquiry;
consequently, the secondary literature is surprisingly meager. Our readings will take us from the
Warring States Period to the Qing dynasty--an interval of over two millennia--and will cover several
varieties of legal documents, including statutes, handbooks, court records, and theoretical treatises. All
the readings will be in English, and no knowledge of Chinese is presumed. Graduate students should
see the instructor to discuss requirement for graduate credit.
651. (EALC251, JPAN491) Readings in Classical Japanese I. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): JPAN 212 or
equivalent.
Readings in classical texts drawn from the Heian, Kamakura, Muromachi, and Edo periods.
Introduction to the different styles of classical Japanese, and to classical Japanese as a whole.
SM 645. (EALC245) Popular Culture in Modern China. (B) Staff.
What constitutes Chinese popular culture in the modern age? How does popular culture contest and
collaborate with modern Chinese literature in the formation of Chinese modernity? This course
provides a comprehensive examination of modern Chinese popular culture in mainland China, Taiwan,
Hong Kong, and other transnational Chinese communities in the past century. From film to literature,
from opera to theatre, from music, vintage photographs, to comic books, this course will probe popular
culture as it has manifested itself in the dynamic dialogue between high art and mass culture, and
trace its sociopolitical, cultural, and aesthetic impact on modern China.
Topics will include the sentimental education through reading popular romance as a new form of
national pastime; the rise of Chinese pictorial journalism; the gender politics of cross-dressing in
Beijing opera as a form of popular entertainment; neo-sensationalism and urban culture in modern
Shanghai; the 1930-40s debate over popular and populist culture; the acoustic modernity of Chinese
popular music; Maoist model operal and revolutionary melodrama; the cult of masculinity in Hong Kong
martial arts fiction and cinema; cultural articulations in post-Maoist Chinese rock music; and the
discourse of violence and body in Chinese youth subculture.
652. (EALC252, JPAN492) Readings in Classical Japanese II. (B) Chance.Prerequisite(s): EALC
251/651/JPAN 491 or equivalent.
Readings in classical texts drawn from the Heian, Kamakura, Muromachi, and Edo periods.
Introduction to the different styles of classical Japanese, and to classical Japanese as a whole.

Page 20 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
653. (EALC253) The Politics of Shinto. (M) Thomas,J..
Shinto-derived images and ideas frequently appear in Japanese anime and film, and journalists and
academics frequently mobilize the term Shinto as a way of explaining Japan s past or envisioning its
future. The environmentalist left champions a green Shinto while Shinto-derived ideas serve as red
meat for politicians pandering to Japan s nationalist right. While the influential position Shinto occupies
in Japanese sociopolitical life is therefore clear, the term Shinto itself is actually not. Depending on
who one asks, Shinto is either the venerable indigenous religion of the Japanese archipelago, the
irreducible core of Japanese culture, a tiny subset of Japanese Buddhism, an oppressive political
ideology linked to the emperor system, an environmentalist ethic, or some combination of these. This
course investigates the multifarious types of Shinto envisioned by these competing interest groups.
SM 654. (EALC254) Tales of the Heike. (C) Chance, L.
Our subject is Tale of the Heike, a multifaceted narrative of the twelfth-century battles that brought the
Taira clan down and led to the establishment of Japan's first military government. We will read the
Heike tales with an eye toward how they fictionalize history and idealize certain types, most notably
loyal women and warriors; the development of the warrior tale genre; central aspects of the Japanese
ethos; and later works of literature based on episodes and characters from the Tale of the Heike. All
material is in English translation. (Students of Japanese language may learn to read a famous section
in the original.) There are no pre-requisites.
SM 655. (EALC255, GSWS255, GSWS654) Japanese Theater. (C) Kano.
Japan has one of the richest and most varied theatrical traditions in the world. In this course, we will
examine Japanese theater in historical and comparative contexts. The readings and discussions will
cover all areas of the theatrical experience (script, acting, stage design, costumes, music, audience).
Audio-visual material will be used whenever appropriate and possible. The class will be conducted in
English, with all English materials.
SM 656. (EALC256) The Tale of Genji. (C) Chance, L..
"Crowning masterpiece of Japanese literature," "the world's first novel," "fountainhead of Japanese
literary and aesthetic culture," "a great soap opera in the vein of Jacqueline Susann." Readers over
the centuries have praised the Tale of Genji, the monumental prose tale finished just after the year
1000, in a variety of ways. In this course we will read the latest English translation of Murasaki
Shikibu's work. We will watch as Genji loses his mother at a tender age, is cast out of the royal family,
and begins a quest to fill the void she left. Along the way, Genji's loyalty to all the women he
encounters forges his reputation as the ideal lover. We will consider gender issues in the female
author's portrayal of this rake, and question the changing audience, from bored court women to
censorious monks, from adoring nationalists to comic book adaptors. Study of the tale requires
consideration of poetry, imagery, costume, music, history, religion, theater, political and material
culture, all of which will be components of the course. We will also trace the effect of the tale's many
motifs, from flora and fauna to murderously jealous spirits, on later literature and conceptions of
human emotions. All material is in English translation. There are no prerequisites.
658. (EALC258) Japanese Architecture. (M) Steinhardt.
An introduction to the visual, aesthetic, historical, religious, philosophical, and symbolic aspects of
Japanese structures from earliest times to the mid-19th century. Through a discussion of shrines,
temples, palaces, tombs, cities, and gardens the student will explore what makes Japanese
architecture distinctive and how the traditions of Japanese architecture evolve over time.

Page 21 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
SM 663. (EALC263) Topics in Japanese Thought. (M) Staff.
Course focuses on a few selected topics for close attention. Topic for 1995-96 will be examination of
certain current social and ethical questions--for instance those having to do with organ transplantation,
abortion, suicide, euthanasia, political corruption, and "openness" as a society. Readings will be on
contemporary questions but include some pre-modern materials that influence the discussion.
679. (EALC279) Contemporary Japanese Society. (M) Staff.
The course will cover a number of social issues in Japan today. Since so much of postwar Japanese
development has been based upon the nature of the relationship between the United States and
Japan, we will begin with a consideration of the occupation of Japan as the crucible in which the
partnership was formed and basic agreements reached. We will examine the nature of the Japanese
political economy, both the extraordinary growth of the economy until the late 1980s and its post-cold
war stagnation. Among the social issues we will examine are ethnic consciousness, marriage and the
family, work and gender roles, school and education. We will conclude with a consideration of Japan's
relations with her Asian neighbors and the lingering problem of Japan's imperialist role in the prewar
and wartime era.
665. (EALC265) Zen Buddhism. (B) Staff. Lectures and discussion.
This course examines the history, doctrines, and practices of Zen Buddhism in China, Japan and the
West. Topics include the monastic life, notable Zen masters, Zen's cultural impact, and enlightenment.
SM 669. (EALC269, RELS489) Japanese Buddhism. (C) Staff.
An introduction to the history and cultural role of Buddhism in Japan. Emphasis is on Buddhism as a
component in the religious, intellectual, and cultural life of the Japanese, especially in poetry and the
visual arts. Includes a short review of prior Buddhism in India and China.
SM 691. (EALC291) Archaeology of Central Asia. (C) Steinhardt.
A site by site investigation of Buddhist and non-Buddhist ruins in Central Asia. Included are Nisa,
Khwarezm, Pyandzhikent, Khalchayan, Ay-Khanum, Bamiyan, Miran, Tumshuk, Kizil, Kucha, Khotan,
Adzhina-Tepe, Khocho, Khara-Khoto, and Bezeklik.
SM 701. Chinese Buddhist Texts. (M) Mair.Prerequisite(s): Knowledge of Classical Chinese required.
Seminar for graduate students focusing on the medieval period.
SM 710. Proseminar East Asia. (M) Staff.
SM 719. The East Asian Monastery. (M) Steinhardt.
SM 720. Topics in Chinese Studies. (M) Mair.
SM 721. (CHIN721) Advanced Classical Chinese I. (M) Staff.
Close reading and interpretation of texts in various styles of classical Chinese drawn from the Han,
Wei, Tang, and Song periods. Focus on strengthening students' reading ability in classical Chinese.
Attention to questions of style, rhetoric, and syntax.
SM 722. (CHIN722) Adv Classical Chinese II. (M) Staff.

Page 22 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
SM 723. Early Vernacular Sinitic. (M) Mair.
Selected reading in mostly medieval Chinese texts.
SM 725. Topics in East Asian Art. (M) Staff.
SM 727. Seminar in East Asian Architecture. (C) Steinhardt.Prerequisite(s): Reading knowledge of
Chinese.
Topic varies. Subjects have included The Chinese Monastery, Chinese Architecture in Shanxi
Province, and Architecture in East Asian Painting.
SM 730. SURVEY CHINESE HISTORY. (C)
SM 740. Sinological Methods. (M) Goldin.
This seminar is designed to acquaint graduate students with the basic methods and resources of
Sinological research. The course will begin with an overview of essential reference works and aids to
study, such as dictionaries and concordances, and continue with a survey of the major primary
sources for the study of traditional Chinese history. Students are required to demonstrate the use of
the methods learned in the course in a research paper, to be presented to the class in the form of a
brief lecture at the end of the semester. Only graduate students may enroll in this course. The
prerequisites are reading knowledge of modern Chinese and two years of the classical language.
Familiarity with Japanese, though not required, would prove helpful.
SM 749. Japanese for Sinologists. (M) Chance, L.Prerequisite(s): Completion of JPAN 112 or the
equivalent. Knowledge of Chinese characters.
An accelerated course in scholarly Japanese for Sinologists and others with a knowledge of Chinese
characters.
SM 750. Japanese Literature: Research Methods in the Classical Tradition. (M) Chance. Requires
Japanese Language
Introduction to bibliographic tools for research in pre-modern literature. Emphasis on hands-on library
work, including how to use libraries in Japan. Covers history and terminology of bibliography. Students
may attend lectures in EALC 152/552 simultaneously, when offered. Final project will use reference
tools for substantive research in individual student's area of interest.
SM 752. Modern Japanese Literature and Culture. (M) Kano.
This seminar will focus on selected topics in modern Japanese literature and culture (Meiji to present
day) varying from year to year. For advanced graduate students. Permission of instructor required.
SM 754. No and Kyogen: Text and Context. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): EALC 552 or equivalent.
Japan's classical theater will be closely read and investigated in terms of certain select literary,
intellectual, and social issues of medieval Japan.
SM 761. Readings in Japanese Religion. (M) Staff.

Page 23 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
SM 755. (COML685) Literary Criticism and Theory in Japanese Literature. (M) Kano.
While the focus of this seminar will shift from year to year, the aim is to enable students to gain 1) a
basic understanding of various theoretical approaches to literature, 2) familiarity with the histories and
conventions of criticism, literary and otherwise, in Japan; 3) a few theoretical tools to think in complex
ways about some of the most interesting and controversial issues of today, such as nationalism,
imperialism, colonialism, postmodernism, and feminism, with particular focus on Japan's position in
the world. The course is primarily intended for graduate students but is also open to advanced
undergraduates with permission of the instructor. The course is taught in English, and all of the
readings will be available in English translation. An optional discussion section may be arranged for
those students who are able and willing to read and discuss materials in Japanese.
SM 756. Readings in Pre-Modern Japanese Literature. (M) Chance.Prerequisite(s): EALC 252
Readings in Classical Japanese II, or equivalent.
Continued reading of texts chosen to accord with student interests. Materials may include calligraphed
manuscripts and Edo period woodblock texts.
SM 758. Teaching Methods in Japanese. (M) Chance. Requires Japanese Language
A practicum for Teaching Fellows and others engaged in teaching Japanese language for the first time.
It introduces various approaches to teaching foreign language and surveys current issues in second
language acquisition, particularly with respect to the less commonly taught languages. Students write
a paper based on their experiences in the classroom.
SM 762. Ethics and Aesthetics in East Asian Buddhism. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Knowledge of
the Japanese or Chinese language.
SM 770. Japanese Bibliography and Problems of Research. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): JPAN 312 or
equivalent.
Weekly sessions on the works of reference necessary for scholarly work in Japanese sources.
Introduction to all main Japanese reference works in religion (Buddhism and Shintism),government,
literature, economics, etc. There are weekly assignments to be prepared in the library reference room.
For advanced graduate students.
771. (GSWS771) Current Japanology. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Knowledge of reading Japanese.
Major trends in scholarship as reflected in important recent publications, especially formative books
and periodical literatures. The trajectory within certain disciplines as well as the interaction among
them will be critically evaluated in terms of gains and losses. Implications of these theses in the
planning of graduate and postgraduate research.
SM 772. Medieval Japan: Texts and Issues. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Knowledge of classical
Japanese required.
Close readings of selected texts (poetry, drama, historical and religious texts) combined with
discussions of major questions in current scholarship on medieval Japan. Guest scholars.

Page 24 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
SM 773. Proseminar: Early Modern Japan. (M) Chance,F. Offered through the College of General
Studies MLA Program
This course will examine in detail the Tokugawa, or Edo, period (1600-1868). In weekly class sessions,
equal attention will be devoted to institutional (political, economic and social) issues on the one hand,
and cultural (art, literature, theater and philosophy/religion) developments on the other. A period in
which Japan enjoyed protracted peace and relative isolation from the outside world, Tokugawa Japan
experienced tremendous changes across all sectors of society. While the changes were unsettling to
Japan's military rulers, they provided important preconditions for the subsequent modernization of
Japan.
SM 774. (HIST630) Readings Modern Japan History. (M) Dickinson.
This graduate seminar will examine the principal debates after 1945 in the writing of modern Japanese
history. We will cover the Tokugawa era (1600-1868)through the immediate postwar years and pay
special attention to the ways in which analyses of modern Japan have changed over time and across
national boundaries (principally, in the United States and Japan). The course aims to give graduate
students a firm grasp of the latest scholarship on modern Japan and of some of its most visible
personalities. Requirements are structured to offer practical training in several critical aspects of
academic life.
SM 780. (HIST630) Readings in Korean History. (M) Park E.Prerequisite(s): Undergraduates need
permission of the instructor.
This course offers a graduate level introduction to the literature of Korean history. It uses a reading list
of classic and noteworthy recent texts to help students map the critical questions and debates that
have shaped the field. The list is also designed to represent key methodological developments,
including gender and transnational histories. The course proceeds as a reading seminar. It meets
weekly. The standard writing requirement is a book review and a historiographical paper on a topic of
the student s choosing. Students are also welcome to write their second-year research paper in
conjunction with the seminar.

CHINESE LANGUAGE COURSES (CHIN)
001. First Year Spoken Chinese I. (A) Dietrich. See LPS Course Guide. ** This course fulfills LPS
language requirement only. It does not fulfill the language requirement for other colleges. only.
This course is designed for students who have little or no previous exposure to Chinese. The main
objective of the course is to help students develop their listening and speaking skills. The emphasis is
on correct pronunciation, accurate tones and mastery of basic grammatical structures. By the end of
the second semester, students will be able to manage many situations that have immediate concern to
them, such as relating one's personal life and experiences, expressing preferences and feelings,
ordering meals, purchasing goods, asking for directions. Chinese characters will not be taught.

Page 25 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
003. Second Year Spoken Chinese I. (A) Dietrich.Prerequisite(s): CHIN002 or permission of the
instructor. See LPS Course Guide. ** This course fulfills LPS language requirement only. It does not
fulfill the language requirement for other colleges.
This course is designed for students who have completed one year of college level Chinese classes or
equivalent. The main objective of the course is to improve students' conversational ability in Chinese.
By the end of the second semester, students will reach the survival level, namely, they can accomplish
the basic day to day tasks encountered by visitors as well as the local people. These tasks include
relating one's personal life and experiences, expressing preference, feeling and opinion, ordering a
meal, purchasing goods, asking for directions, making travel plans, visiting a doctor, attending a social
function and so forth. Short Chinese movies or television shows will be integrated into the course
curriculum. Chinese character will not be taught.
002. First Year Spoken Chinese II. (B) Dietrich.Prerequisite(s): CHIN001 or permission of the
instructor. See LPS Course Guide. ** This course fulfills LPS language requirement only. It does not
fulfill the language requirement for other colleges.
A continuation of CHIN001, This course is to help students develop their listening and speaking skills.
The emphasis is on correct pronunciation, accurate tones and mastery of basic grammatical
structures. By the end of the semester, students will be able to manage many situations that have
immediate concern to them, such as relating one's personal life and experiences, expressing
preferences and feelings, ordering meals, purchasing goods, asking for directions. To achieve this
goal, the class is to be conducted in Chinese as much as possible. Chinese characters will also be
introduced, but will not be the focus of the class.
004. 2nd Year Spoken Chinese II. (B) Dietrich.Prerequisite(s): CHIN003 or permission of the
instructor. See LPS Course Guide. ** This course fulfills LPS language requirement only. It does not
fulfill the language requirement for other colleges.
This course is the continuation of CHIN003. The primary goal of the course is to improve students'
conversational ability in Chinese. By the end of the semester, students will reach the survival level,
namely, they can accomplish the basic day to day tasks encountered by visitors as well as the local
people. These tasks include relating one's personal life and experiences, expressing preference,
feeling and opinion, ordering a meal, purchasing goods, asking directions, making travel plans, visiting
a doctor, attending a social function and so forth. Short Chinese movies or television shows will be
integrated into the course curriculum. Chinese character will not be taught.

Page 26 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
011. Beginning Modern Chinese I. (A) Dietrich.
Along with CHIN012, CHIN111 and CHIN112, this is the first course of a four-semester sequence. By
completing all four semesters, students fulfill the College language requirement. The sequence starts
each fall. Students cannot begin their study in the spring. This course is designed primarily for students
who have little or no prior exposure to Chinese. The objective of the course is to help students build a
solid foundation of the four basic skills--listening, speaking, reading, and writing in an interactive and
communicative learning environment. The emphasis is on correct pronunciation, accurate tones and
mastery of basic grammatical structures. By the end of the second semester, students will be able to
manage many situations that have immediate concern to them, such as relating one's personal life
and experiences, expressing preferences and feelings, ordering meals, purchasing goods and asking
for directions.
This course is designed primarily for students who have little or no prior exposure to Chinese. The
objective of the course is to help students build a solid foundation of the four basic skills--listening,
speaking, reading, and writing in an interactive and communicative learning environment. The
emphasis is on correct pronunciation, accurate tones and mastery of basic grammatical structures. By
the end of the second semester, students will be able to manage many situations that have immediate
concern to them, such as relating one's personal life and experiences, expressing preferences and
feelings, ordering meals, purchasing goods and asking for directions. In order to achieve these goals,
students are expected to thoroughly preview and review the materials according to the weekly lesson
plan (on course website) prior to attending class. Regular attendance is mandatory and strictly
monitored.
012. Beginning Modern Chinese II. (B) Dietrich.Prerequisite(s): CHIN011 or permission of the
instructor. Along with CHIN011, CHIN111 and CHIN112, this is the second course in a four-semester
sequence. By completing all four semesters, students fulfill the College language requirement.
This course is the continuation of CHIN 011 The objective of the course is to help students build a
solid foundation of the four basic skills--listening, speaking, reading, and writing in an interactive and
communicative learning environment. The emphasis is on correct pronunciation, accurate tones and
mastery of basic grammatical structures. By the end of the second semester, students will be able to
manage many situations that have immediate concern to them, such as relating one's personal life
and experiences, expressing preferences and feelings, ordering meals, purchasing goods and asking
for directions.
021. Intensive Beginning Modern Chinese I & II. (A) Staff. Designed for students who have had
limited prior exposure to some form of Chinese (Mandarin or other dialects), but inadequate to
advance to the intermediate level.
This is a two-semester course covering the same material as CHIN011, CHIN012, CHIN111 and
CHIN112. The main objective of the course is to help students build a solid foundation of the four basic
skills--listening, speaking, reading, and writing Chinese. By the end of this course and CHIN022,
students should achieve the following goals: 1)pronounce all the sounds in Mandarin Chinese
accurately and comfortably with a good command of the 4 tones; 2)carry out basic conversations in
daily activities; 3) recognize and reproduce approximately 600-650 characters; and 4) read edited
simple stories and write short notes or letters. Grammatical and cultural related issues are discussed
during lecture hours. Oral communication tasks are given every week.
041. Beginning Cantonese I. (A) Staff. Offered through the Penn Language Center. This course does
not fulfill the College of Arts & Sciences' language requirement.
Beginning Cantonese is a preliminary course for spoken Cantonese. The course provides fundamental
aspects of the dialect as experienced in daily life situations and will enable students to communicate in
Cantonese for daily life needs, such as making phone calls, making purchases, getting around by
various means of transportation, seeing a doctor, being a guest or a host at dinner, talking about the
weather, talking about sports and entertainment, etc. The course will be completed in two semesters.

Page 27 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
022. Intensive Beginning Modern Chinese III & IV. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): CHIN021 or permission
of the instructor. Designed for students who have had limited prior exposure to some form of Chinese
(Mandarin or other dialects), but inadequate to advance to the intermediate level.
Designed for students who have had limited prior exposure to some form of Chinese (Mandarin or
other dialects), but inadequate to advance to the intermediate level.
031. Beginning Reading and Writing in Chinese I (for Fluent Speakers). (A) Wu.Prerequisite(s):
Restricted to students who can speak Chinese but cannot read or write the language.
Students focus on reading and writing skills. The objective of the course is to lay a solid foundation in
both Pinyin romanization and Chinese characters, learning to produce and recognize approximately
600-650 characters. The class provides preparation for Intermediate Modern Chinese.
032. Beginning Reading and Writing in Chinese II (for Fluent Speakers). (B) Wu.Prerequisite(s):
CHIN 031 or permission of the instructor.
042. Beginning Cantonese II. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): CHIN041 or permission of the instructor.
Offered through the Penn Language Center. This course does not count toward the language
requirement in the College of Arts and Sciences.
Beginning Cantonese is a preliminary course for spoken Cantonese. The course provides fundamental
aspects of the dialect as experienced in daily life situations and will enable students to communicate in
Cantonese for daily life needs, such as making phone calls, making purchases, getting around by
various means of transportation, seeing a doctor, being a guest or a host at dinner, talking about the
weather, talking about sports and entertainment, etc. The course will be completed in two semesters.
051. Beginning Taiwanese I. (A) Wu. Offered through the Penn Language Center
Beginning Taiwanese CHIN 051 is designed to help you learn enough about Taiwanese to enable you
to handle your needs adequately if you travel to Taiwan. At this survival level, you will learn to greet
others, introduce yourself and handle basic social situations. You will also acquire the understanding
of oral language typically heard in locations such as grocery store, train station, bus stop and night
market. Self study and classroom participation are equally important for this course. You should
complete each assignment before class so that the teacher may review the work. You should attend
individual session regularly. You will have four quizzes and one final oral test. The preparation should
include memorizing dialogue and listening to audio files.
052. Beginning Taiwanese II. (B) Wu.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 051 or permission of the instructor.
081. Beginning Business Chinese I. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): This course does not fulfill the
language requirement in the College. First meeting mandatory.
The course is designed for students and working professionals who have no prior exposure to
Chinese, and are interested in conducting business in China. The objective of this course is to build a
solid foundation of basic Chinese in the business context, with a main focus on speaking and listening.
Upon Completion students are expected to be able to converse and interact with people in a variety of
business settings. Topics in the course units include meeting people, talking about family, introducing
companies, making inquiries and appointments, visiting company, introducing products, initiating
dining invitations and practicing dining etiquette.

Page 28 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
111. Beginning Chinese III (Non-Intensive). (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of CHIN012 or the
equivalent or permission of the instructor.
Along with CHIN011, CHIN012 and CHIN112, this is the third course in a four-semester sequence.
The objective of the course is to continue building a solid foundation of the four basic skills--listening,
speaking, reading and writing. By the end of this course, students should achieve the following goals:
1) pronounce all the sounds in Mandarin accurately and comfortably with a good command of the four
tones; 2) carry out simple dialogues of familiar topics; 3) recognize and reproduce approximately
450-500 characters; and 4) read short textbook stories and write simple notes. In order to develop
students' listening and speaking ability, oral communication tasks are given on each lesson.
112. Beginning Chinese IV. (B) Staff.
Along with CHIN011, CHIN012 and CHIN111, this is the fourth course in a four-semester sequence.
The objective of the course is to continue building a solid foundation of the four basic skills--listening,
speaking, reading and writing. By the end of this course, students should achieve the following goals:
1) pronounce all the sounds in Mandarin accurately and comfortably with a good command of the four
tones; 2) carry out simple dialogues of familiar topics; 3) recognize and reproduce approximately
600-650 characters; and 4) read short textbook stories and write simple notes In order to develop
students' listening and speaking ability, oral communication tasks are given every other week.
152. Intermediate Taiwanese II. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of the second semester of CHIN
151 or permission of the instructor. Offered through the Penn Language Center.
141. Intermediate Cantonese I. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): CHIN042 or equivalent or permission of the
instructor. Offered through the Penn Language Center.
Intermediate Cantonese is a course for students who are able to communicate in the dialect in basic
survival situations. Through this course the students will acquire a better understanding of Cantonese
and its related culture, and can confidently cope with a wide range of situations. Clases will be
conducted through Cantonese textbooks, discussions of various topics, and composition and
presentation of students' own dialogues so that in time they may express more complex ideas and
feelings. The course will be completed in two semesters.
142. Intermediate Cantonese II. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 141 or permission of instructor.
Offered through the Penn Language Center.
Intermediate Cantonese is a course for students who are able to communicate in the dialect in basic
survival situations. Through this course the students will acquire a better understanding of Cantonese
and its related culture, and can confidently cope with a wide range of situations. Classes will be
conducted through Cantonese textbooks, discussions of various topics, and composition and
presentation of students' own dialogues so that in time they may express more complex ideas and
feelings. The course will be completed in two semesters.
151. Intermediate Taiwanese I. (A) Wu.Prerequisite(s): CHIN052 or equivalent or permission of the
instructor. Offered through Penn Language Center.
A continuation of CHIN052, the spoken and written Taiwanese language.

Page 29 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
211. Intermediate Modern Chinese I. (A) Lee.Prerequisite(s): CHIN112 or permission of the
instructor.
This is an intermediate language course. It aims to develop students' overall linguistic skills in listening,
speaking, reading, and writing Chinese. The specially designed textbook gives introduction to various
topics on Chinese culture. Students can expect to gain knowledge about China while they are learning
the language. By completion of the course, students are expected to be able to master 1200 most
frequently used characters in common reading materials, and to communicate with Chinese on
212. Intermediate Modern Chinese II. (B) Lee.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 211 or permission of the
instructor.
231. Intermediate Reading and Writing Chinese I (for Fluent Speakers). (A) Wu.Prerequisite(s):
CHIN 032 or the equivalent or permission of the instructor. Restricted to fluent speakers who have only
limited reading and writing abilities.
This is an intermediate language class presuming basic fluency in speaking and listening and focusing
on reading and writing abilities. By the end of the class students are expected to have mastered 1200
most commonly used characters and to have the ability to read basic Chinese texts. Students will be
prepared for Advanced Modern Chinese or the commercial track.
232. Intermediate Reading and Writing Chinese II (for Fluent Speakers). (B) Wu.Prerequisite(s):
CHIN 231 or permission of the instructor.
This is an intermediate language class presuming basic fluency in speaking and listening and focusing
on reading and writing abilities. By the end of the semester students are expected to have mastered
the 1200 most commonly used characters and to have the ability to read basic Chinese texts. Students
will be prepared for Advanced Modern Chinese or the commercial track.
311. Advanced Modern Chinese I. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 212 or permission of the instructor.
Students learn to work on materials which were written or produced for native speakers, instead of the
classroom materials that were written for the non-native speakers. The reading materials include a
larger vocabulary with more idioms. Students will also learn how to understand and use certain oral
expressions in conversation. They will learn ways to narrate, to describe, and to comment in native
Chinese ways. Reading and audio materials are provided and discussed in the classes. Writing and
oral presentations in Chinese are required in classroom under instruction. Students will be encouraged
to practice oral communication with each other.
312. Advanced Modern Chinese II. (B) Jiao.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 311 or permission of the instructor.
A continuation of CHIN 311 with more reading and discussions on social and cultural topics.
331. Advanced Chinese Reading and Writing. (C) Chiang.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 312 or permission
of the instructor.
Designed for students with advanced level Chinese language training but who need some further
refinements on pronunciation, grammar, and vocabulary usage, this course stresses oral discussion,
composition, and accuracy of language performance. By reading texts written by contemporary
writers, students will also gain knowledge of China from an analytical and comparative perspective.

Page 30 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
361. Media Chinese I. (A) Chiang.Prerequisite(s): Completion of CHIN 232, 311, 331 or permission of
the instructor.
This course will help students improve their language skills, and enlarge vocabulary through reading
newspapers published in China in the target language. The students will learn formal and high-level
vocabulary and enhance their grammatical accuracy. The class will be conducted in Chinese, and
students will be encouraged to speak Chinese in class using the acquired vocabulary and grammatical
patterns.
362. Newspaper Chinese II. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 631 or permission of the instructor.
A continuation of CHIN 361.
381. (CHIN581) Business Chinese I. (A) Wang.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 232, 312 or permission of the
instructor.
This course is aimed to enhance students' language skills in a business context and to promote their
understanding about business environment and culture in contemporary China. The text is developed
from real business cases from real multinational companies that have successfully embarked on the
Chinese market. The forms of classes include lectures, drills on vocabulary and sentence patterns,
and discussions. Class will be conducted in Chinese. In addition to the course textbook, students will
learn to read business news in Chinese selected from Wall Street Journal.
371. Advanced Spoken Mandarin I. (A) Lee.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 212 or permission of the
instructor.
This course is designed for students who have completed at least the intermediate level Chinese
language course, or have studied the language for at least three years. The objective of this course is
to consolidate the knowledge and skills students have acquired from their previous Mandarin Chinese
classes and to enhance their oral expressive skills. By the end of the semester, students are expected
to be able to carry on a conversation with a native Mandarin speaker on various common topics,
including the current issues in China about its education, society, politics, culture, and history. Students
will also learn how to gather information necessary for conducting oral presentations and speeches.
372. Advanced Spoken Mandarin II. (B) Lee.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 212 or permission of the
instructor.
Following the format of Advanced Spoken Mandarin I with more discussions on current issues in both
China and the US, including topics ranging from race, religion, gender issues to internet, cinema and
pop cultures. The objective of this course is to consolidate the knowledge and skills students have
acquired from their previous Mandarin Chinese classes and to enhance their oral expressive skills. By
the end of the semester, students are expected to be able to carry on a conversation with a native
Mandarin speaker on various common topics, and to gather information necessary for conducting oral
presentations and speeches.
382. (CHIN582) Business Chinese II. (B) Wang.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 312, 361, 381 or permission
from the instructor.
This course is the second half of a one-year course for business oriented subjects. This course will
provide an overview of China's changing macro-environment, while real business cases let us look into
individual Chinese companies and their development in the new millennium. By the end of the
semester, students are expected to 1) enhance the cultural awareness of contemporary China and the
Chinese business world; 2) gain vocabulary and fluency in Chinese to function more confidently and
comfortably in real business settings; 3) access business news and information in Chinese; 4) give
business presentation in Chinese.

Page 31 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
411. Readings in Modern Chinese: Literature. (A) Dietrich.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 331, 361, 382 or
permission of the instructor.
This course is designed for students who have completed three years of college level Mandarin
classes or equivalent. This course may be used to fulfill language or elective requirement for Chinese
major or minor. The objectives of the course are 1) to help students gain an in-depth, multi-faceted and
critical understanding of Chinese people, Chinese society and Chinese culture; 2) to facilitate
students'acquisition of formal or written language; and 3) to develop students' analytical and critical
thinking skills. These objectives are achieved primarily through 1) close reading and discussion of
original literary texts by 20th -century Chinese writers; and 2) regular writing exercises. Students will
also view several Chinese films that are related to the topics of the reading text. The class is to be
conducted exclusively in Chinese.
412. Readings Modern Chinese II: Literature. (B) Dietrich.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 331, 361, 382 or
permission of the instructor.
The main difference between this course and CHIN411 is the reading materials and topics. This
course is designed for students who have completed a minimum of three years of college level
Mandarin classes or equivalent. This course may be used to fulfill language or elective requirement for
Chinese major or minor. The objectives of the course are 1) to help students gain an in-depth, multifaceted and critical understanding of Chinese people, Chinese society and Chinese culture; 2) to
facilitate students acquisition of formal or written language; and 3) to develop students' analytical and
critical thinking skills. These objectives are achieved primarily through 1) close reading and discussion
of original literary texts by 20th-century Chinese writers; and 2) regular writing exercises. Students will
also view several Chinese films that are related to the topics of the reading text. The class is to be
conducted exclusively in Chinese.
415. Readings Modern Chinese Documents. (M) Chiang.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 361, 381, 411 or
permission of the instructor.
The main purpose of this content-based course is to promote advance-level language proficiency in
reading, writing, speaking and listening. Through the use of modern Chinese documents, the
secondary purpose of this course is to facilitate your understanding of the changes of Chinese society
in the 20th century. Topics will include the Constitution of China, China's legal system, speeches by
Mao Zedong, Deng Xiaoping, Sun Yet-san and Qiu Jin.
471. Advanced Spoken Mandarin III. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 312 or the equivalent, or
permission of the instructor.
This course is designed for students who have completed at least the intermediate advanced level
Chinese language course (CHIN-311 & CHIN-312) at University of Pennsylvania, or equivalent level.
The objective of this course is to consolidate the knowledge and skills students have acquired from
their previous Mandarin Chinese classes and to enhance their oral expressive skills. Students in this
course are already able to carry on a conversation with a Mandarin speaker on various social topics,
and this course is much more focused on Chinese pop culture from early 20th century till now.
492. (EALC222, EALC622) 1st Year Classical Chin II. (B) Mair.
Continuation of CHIN491 EALC221/621, which is the only prerequisite for this course. Upon
completion of Shadick, readings in a wide selection of texts with Chinese commentaries may be taken
up. These readings are in part chosen to reflect student interest. This is the second half of a year-long
course. Those who enroll must take both semesters.

Page 32 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
481. Advanced Business Chinese I. (A) Chiang.Prerequisite(s): CHIN382 or equivalent or
permission of the instructor. May be offered through Penn Language Center.
This course provides students with the conceptual framework to understand issues China has been
facing since its economic reform in 1978. Topics include WTO principles, the change of China's stateowned enterprises, China's economy in Mao's period, and the pros and cons of globalization. Students
will be trained in reading financial articles, discussing international trades, conducting online research
and giving business presentations. After the course, students will become more sophisticated in their
understanding of China's economic development and in using Chinese business terminology at
professional settings. The course assumes basic background in business and advanced level
proficiency in Chinese language. The course is NOT open to freshman with no undergraduate
business course.
482. Advanced Business Chinese II. (B) Chiang.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 481 or permission of the
instructor.
Following the format of Advanced Business Chinese I, this course covers topics on Eastern and
Western management styles, the global financial market, China's financial market reforms, and
mergers and acquisitions in China. The course is NOT open to freshman with no undergraduate
business course.
491. (EALC221, EALC621) First Year Classical Chinese I. (A) Mair.
Introduction to the classical written language, beginning with Shadick, First Course in Literary Chinese.
Students with a background in Japanese, Korean, Cantonese, Taiwanese, and other East Asian
languages are welcome; it is not necessary to know Mandarin. The course begins from scratch, and
swiftly but rigorously develops the ability to read a wide variety of classical and semi-classical styles.
Original texts from the 6th century BC to the 20th century AD are studied. This course is taught in
English and there are no prerequisites.
510. Topics in Chinese Culture. (B) Chiang.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 411, 481 or permission of the
instructor.
The objective of this superior level content course is to extend and refine students' language and
analytical skills while enhancing the appreciation of Chinese culture. The course is for students with
native-like competence in Mandarin. Each class will proceed from reading, reflection, and
interpretation, to the exchange of ideas. All reading materials are in Chinese with no glossary and all
are written by scholars whose expertise are wither in contemporary and traditional culture of China, or
in comparative study of Chinese and Western thoughts. Topics include: (1) the shared beliefs and
behaviors of Chinese people; (2) traditional values and new values in the technological and business
society; (3) how affection and love are manifested in Chinese culture; (4) what influenced the surge of
popularity of Chinese wuxia fiction; (5) what it meant to be descendants of Chinese (huayi) living
outside China. The class is conducted exclusively in Mandarin Chinese.
515. Topics in Chinese Literature. (M) Dietrich.Prerequisite(s): CHIN 411, CHIN 412, CHIN 415, 481,
482 or permission of the instructor.
This course surveys the literary movements of the post-Cultural Revolution era (1978-present).The
reading consists of fictional works representative of each literary movement. Students will write four
short (1-2 pages, double space) "responding" papers and two longer critical essays (5-7 pages double
spaced). Each student will also give one oral presentation to the class on an assigned story. This
course is designed for students who have achieved native or near native level of reading and writing
proficiency in Chinese. The class is conducted exclusively in Chinese.

Page 33 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
621. (CHIN491, EALC221) First Year Classical Chinese I. (A) Mair.
Introduction to the classical written language, beginning with Shadick, First Course in Literary Chinese.
Students with a background in Japanese, Korean, Cantonese, Taiwanese, and other East Asian
languages are welcome; it is not necessary to know Mandarin. The course begins from scratch, and
swiftly but rigorously develops the ability to read a wide variety of classical and semi-classical styles.
Original texts from the 6th century BC to the 20th century AD are studied. This course is taught in
English and there are no prerequisites.
622. (CHIN492, EALC222) 1st Year Classical Chin II. (B) Mair.Prerequisite(s): None.
Continuation of CHIN491 EALC221/621, which is the only prerequisite for this course. Upon
completion of Shadick, readings in a wide selection of texts with Chinese commentaries may be taken
up. These readings are in part chosen to reflect student interest. This is the second half of a year-long
course. Those who enroll must take both semesters.

JAPANESE LANGUAGE COURSES (JPAN)
002. Introduction to Spoken Japanese II. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of JPAN 001 or the
equivalent. See LPS Course Guide. **This course does not fulfill the language requirement in the
College.
Although some reading/writing instruction is given, the major emphasis is on oral communication skill.
011. Beginning Japanese I. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): None.
Intended for students who have no Japanese background. All four skills, speaking/listening/writing/
reading, are equally emphasized. Hiragana/Katakana (Two sets of Japanese syllabic letters) and some
Chinese characters (Kanji) are introduced. Textbooks: Yookoso I (Getting Started - Chapt. 3) and basic
Kanji Book I (L.1-L.4) Kanji: reproduction-approx.50/recognitio-approx.80
012. Beginning Japanese II. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of JPAN 011 or the equivalent.
Textbooks: Yookoso I (Chapt. 4 - Chapt. 7) and Basic Kanji Book I (L.5 - L.10) Kanji: reproductionapprox. 110/recognitio-approx.200
112. Beginning Japanese IV. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of JPAN 111 or the equivalent.
This course completes the College language requirement. Textbooks: Yookoso II (Chapt. 4 - Chapt. 7)
& Basic Kanji Book I (L.17-L.22) Kanji: reproduction-approx250/recognitio-approx.350
021. Intensive Beginning Japanese I. (A) Staff.
Intended for students with little or no background in Japanese who wish to finish the language
requirement in one year. (Equivalent to JPAN 011 + JPAN 012) Textbooks: Yookoso I and Basic Kanji
Book I (L.1-L,10) Kanji: reproduction-approx.110/recognitio-approx.200
022. Intensive Beginning Japanese II. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): completion of JPAN 021 or the
equivalent.
This course is the equivalent to JPAN 111 + JPAN 112, and completes the College language
requirement. Textbooks: Yookoso II and Basic kanji book I (L.11 - L.22) Kanji: reproduction-approx.250/
recognitio-approx 350

Page 34 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
111. Beginning Japanese III. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of JPAN 012 or the equivalent.
Continuation of JPAN 012. Textbooks: Yookoso II (Do You Remember-Chapt. 3) and Basic Kanji Book I
(L.11 - L.16) Kanji: reproduction-approx.170/recognitio-approx.250
211. Intermediate Japanese I. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of JPAN 112 or JPAN 022 or the
equivalent.
A continuation of Japanese language beyond the language requirement. Textbooks: Integrated
Approach to Intermediate Japanese (L.1 - L.8), and Basic Kanji Book II (L.23 - L.30) Kanji:
reproduction-approx.310/recognitio-approx.400
212. Intermediate Japanese II. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of JPAN 211 or the equivalent.
A continuation of Japanese language at the intermediate level Text books: Integrated Approach to the
Intermediate Japanese (L.9 - L.15) and Basic Kanji Book I (L.31 - L.37) Kanji: reproductionapprox.370/recognitio-approx.450
311. (JPAN611) Intermediate Japanese III. (A) Takami.Prerequisite(s): Completion of JPAN 212 or
the equivalent.
This course is a continuation of Japanese language at the upper intermediate level, and authentic
reading/listening materials are introduced besides the textbooks. Textbooks: Tobira: Gateway to
Advanced Japanese (L.1 - L.7 , Basic Kanji Book II (L.37 - L.45), Kanji: reproduction-approx500/
recognitio-approx.550
312. (JPAN612) Intermediate Japanese IV. (B) Takami.Prerequisite(s): Completion of JPAN 311 or
the equivalent.
Textbooks: Textbooks: Tobira: Gateway to Advanced Japanese L.8-L.14 , and selected video materials.
Kanji: reproduction-approx.550/recognitio-approx.700
381. Japanese for the Professions. (A) Takami.Prerequisite(s): Completion of JPAN 212 or the
equivalent. Offered through Penn Language Center.
An intermediate level course of Japanese language focusing on workplace-related topics. Intended for
students who will use Japanese in the professions. Textbook: Powering Up Your Japanese Through
Case Studies: Intermediate and Advanced Japanese.
382. (JPAN682) Japanese for the Professions II. (B) Takami.Prerequisite(s): Completion of JPAN
381 or the equivalent. Offered through the Penn Language Center
An intermediate level course of Japanese language focusing on workplace-related topics. Intended for
students who will use Japanese in the professions. Textbook: Powering Up Your Japanese Through
Case Studies: Intermediate and Advanced Japanese.
411. Advanced Japanese I. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of JPAN 312 or the equivalent.
Minimum 600 - 700 kanji knowledge is expected. A continuation of Japanese language beyond the
intermediate level.
412. Advanced Japanese II. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of JPAN 411 or the equivalent.

Page 35 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
481. Advanced Japanese for Proficiency I. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of the JPAN 312 or
382 or the equivalent. Offered through Penn Language Center.
This course is for students with an advanced background in Japanese, who are interested in taking at
least the Level 2 Japanese Proficiency Test. Solid grammar, an extensive vocabulary, and the
knowledge of at least 800-900 Chinese characters is required. This course is not continuous with any
existing 300-level Japanese course; therefore, your grade from a 300-level course does not qualify you
to take this course. Eligibility will be determined through an interview and placement test taken in the
first meeting. All students who take this course are required to take the Japanese Proficiency Test in
December.
Since the JLPT is administered in December every year, if you wish to fully prepare for the test, the
instructor strongly recommends that you take JPAN 482 first in the spring of the same year. For
example, if you plan to take the test in December, 2010, start taking 482 in the spring 2010 and take
481 in the fall 2010. Different from other courses, this full-year course begins in the spring and ends in
the fall, because the test is given in December. However, participation in 482 is optional.
482. Advanced Japanese for Proficiency II. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Japanese proficiency test and
permission of instructor. Offered through the Penn Language Center.
This course is for students with an advanced-low or advanced-mid background in Japanese, aiming to
strengthen the four language skills (speaking, reading, writing, and listening) and to deepen their
understanding of Japanese culture. The class will use authentic Japanese through media, such as
newspapers, television, and articles, regarding Japanese culture and society as well as current news.
Students will narrate, describe, and express their opinions with details, examples, and strong
reasoning, using sophisticated terms and phrases related such topics.
491. (EALC251, EALC651) Readings in Classical Japanese I. (A) Chance, L..Prerequisite(s):
Completion of JPAN 212 or equivalent.
Readings in classical texts drawn from the Heian, Kamakura, Muromachi, and Edo periods.
Introduction to the different styles of classical Japanese, and to classical Japanese as a whole.
611. (JPAN311) INTERMED JAPANESE III. (A)
492. (EALC252, EALC652) Readings in Classical Japanese II. (B) Chance.Prerequisite(s): JPAN
212.
Readings in classical texts drawn from the Heian, Kamakura, Muromachi, and Edo periods.
Introduction to the different styles of classical Japanese, and to classical Japanese as a whole.
511. Readings in Advanced Japanese. (G) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of JPAN 412 or the
equivalent.
Readings in advanced literary and journalistic texts written in modern Japanese.
512. Readings Advanced Japanese II. (D) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of JPAN 511 or the
equivalent.
Readings in advanced literary and journalistic texts written in modern Japanese.
612. (JPAN312) Intermediate Japanese IV. (B)

Page 36 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
682. (JPAN382) Japanese for the Professions II. (B) Takami.Prerequisite(s): Completion of JPAN
381 or the equivalent. Offered through the Penn Language Center
An intermediate level course of Japanese language focusing on workplace-related topics. Intended for
students who will use Japanese in the professions. Textbook: Powering Up Your Japanese Through
Case Studies: Intermediate and Advanced Japanese.

KOREAN LANGUAGE COURSES (KORN)
011. Elementary Korean I. (A) Staff.
This course is designed for students who have little or no knowledge of Korean. This course aims to
develop foundational reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills through meaningful communicative
activities and tasks. Upon successful completion of this course, students should be able to
comprehend and carry on simple daily conversations and create simple sentences in the past,
present, and future tenses. Students will learn how to introduce themselves, describe their
surroundings, talk about daily lives, friends and relatives, and talk about past and future events.
012. Elementary Korean II. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of KORN 011 or equivalent
knowledge and permission of the instructor.
This is a continuation of KORN 011. This course aims to further develop the four language skills of
students to the novice-high level by building on materials covered in KORN 011. Students will learn
how to use three speech styles (polite formal, informal, and intimate) appropriately in a given context.
Upon successful completion of this course, students should be able to handle simple and elementary
needs of daily lives and talk (and write) about a variety of topics such as family, college life, birthday
celebration, shopping, Korean food, etc.
111. Intermediate Korean I. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of KORN 012 or equivalent
knowledge and permission of the instructor.
This is a continuation of KORN 012. This course is designed to develop students' Korean language
proficiency to the intermediate-low level of the ACTFL Proficiency Guidelines. Authentic materials, as
well as various student-centered activities that are highly contextualized in everyday interactions will
be used. Upon completion of the course, students will be able to present and exchange information on
a variety of topics such as weather, fashion, travel, mailing, housing, public transportation, and
shopping.
112. Intermediate Korean II. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of KORN 111 or equivalent
knowledge and permission of the instructor.
This is a continuation of KORN 111. This course is designed to develop students' Korean language
proficiency to the intermediate-mid level of the ACTFL Proficiency Guidelines. This course expands
student's competence by dealing with more functions in various contexts that students can frequently
encounter in everyday interactions. In order to prepare students for social contexts, students are
encouraged to engage in conversations by personalizing the topics, functions or contexts. Students will
perform in an interpersonal way by providing and obtaining information, expressing feelings and
emotions, and exchanging opinions on a variety of topics such as birthday parties, recreation and
hobbies, Korean holidays, marriage, cultural differences, education and jobs. This course completes
the College language requirement.

Page 37 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
131. Korean for Heritage Speakers I. (A) Jung.Prerequisite(s): Restricted to students who have
previous knowledge in Korean. Students are required to take the Korean placement test.
This course is designed for heritage speakers who have a strong background in everyday Korean. This
course focuses on enhancing linguistic accuracy (spelling, grammar, vocabulary, pronunciation) and
fluency (idiomatic and figurative expressions, narrative structure, discursive practice) in both spoken
and written Korean, as well as gaining a deeper understanding of Korean culture. Upon completion of
the course, students will be able to express themselves more accurately and participate in Korearelated communities more meaningfully. This course and its subsequent course KORN 132 complete
the College language requirement.
132. Korean for Heritage Speakers II. (B) Jung.Prerequisite(s): Completion of KORN 131 or
equivalent knowledge and permission of the instructor.
This course is a continuation of KORN 131 and aims to further develop students' linguistic and cultural
competence by building on materials covered in KORN 131. In addition to gaining a deeper
understanding of Korean culture, the course focuses on enhancing linguistic accuracy and fluency in
both spoken and written Korean. Particular emphasis will be placed on building a meaningful Koreanspeaking community, as well as consolidation of grammar structures, and expansion and
enhancement of vocabulary. Topics include preparing for a trip to Korea, finding housing, college
culture in Korea, entertainment and participating in various social events. Upon completion of this
course, students will be able to express themselves more accurately and participate in Korea-related
communities more meaningfully. This course completes the College language requirement.
381. Business Korean I. (M) Cho.Prerequisite(s): Completion of KORN 212 or equivalent knowledge
and permission of the instructor.
Offered through the Penn Language Center. Business Korean I is designed for students who want to
sharpen their Korean language skills to the advanced-high level by focusing their study on Korean
business and economy. Students will learn business/economy-related terminologies and concepts.
They will also take an in-depth look at the issues related to business practices and environment in
Korea. Students will improve and refine their language skills through actively participating in
discussions, research, and presentations.
211. Advanced Korean I. (A) Cho.Prerequisite(s): Completion of KORN 112, 132 or equivalent
knowledge and permission of the instructor.
This course aims to develop functional proficiency in Korean at the intermediate-high level. Students
will develop competence in fluency, grammatical accuracy and socio-linguistic/cultural appropriateness
through a variety of activities and assignments. In addition, students will learn to communicate using
more sophisticated grammatical structures and advanced vocabulary on various topics. The
development of each of the four language skills (speaking, listening, reading and writing) is equally
emphasized.
212. Advanced Korean II. (B) Cho.Prerequisite(s): Completion of KORN 211 or equivalent knowledge
and permission of the instructor.
This is a continuation of KORN 211. Students continue to develop functional proficiency in Korean at
the advanced-low level. The topics include literature, culture, Korean customs, and social issues in
contemporary Korea.

Page 38 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
281. BUSINESS COMM IN KOREAN. (A) Cho.Prerequisite(s): completion of KORN 211 or equivelent
knowledge and permission of the instructor.
Offered through the Penn Language Center. This course is designed to help students improve their
Korean language proficiency by learning essential communication skills necessary to engage in
business in Korea. Students will also develop their knowledge of and competence in Korean business
culture and practice. The course objectives include: (1) to learn essential business terms, advanced
grammar structures and communication strategies in business transactions; (2) to learn Korean
business customs and culture, work norms, and business etiquette that students need to successfully
communicate in a Korean business context. Topics include job application, business correspondence
and reports, discussion and presentation in business meetings, communication styles and strategies
in business contexts, current business culture, etc.
382. Business Korean II. (M) Cho.Prerequisite(s): Completion of KORN 381 or equivalent knowledge
and permission of the instructor.
Offered through the Penn Language Center. A continuation of the material offered in KORN 381.
Business Korean I. Students further develop their Korean language proficiency at the advance-high
level by studying case studies, participating in discussions, and doing research and giving
presentations on the topic of current Korean business and economy.
431. Advanced Readings Modern Korean I. (M) Jung.Prerequisite(s): Completion of KORN 312, 382
or equivalent knowledge and permission of the instructor.
This course is designed for advanced level students. Based on literary pieces in the form of short
stories, essays, and novels, students are to gain an in-depth, multi-faceted and critical understanding
of Korean people, society, and culture. These objectives are achieved primarily through 1) close
reading and discussion of original literary texts by 20th -century Korean writers; and 2) regular writing
exercises. Some Korean films that are related to the topics of the reading text will be used.
432. Advanced Readings in Modern Korean II. (B) Jung.Prerequisite(s): Completion of KORN 431
or equivalent knowledge and permission of the instructor.
This course allows development of creative and analytical thinking through introduction of more
organized thematic topics such as family, human relationships, and the reflection of self-images, and
individual's mental status while the society changes in time.
481. Advanced Business Korean I. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of 312, 382 or equivalent
knowledge and permission of the instructor.
Offered through the Penn Language Center. This course aims to further develop students' advanced
language proficiency and simultaneously deepen their knowledge and understanding of specific areas
related to Korean business and economy such as an expansion of business into Asian markets and
globalization strategies. Through research, discussion and presentation on various case studies and
other business-related materials, students will enhance their critical thinking skills and gain an in-depth
perspective on issues related to contemporary Korean business operations and practices.

Page 39 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
482. Advanced Business Korean II. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of KORN 481 or equivalent
knowledge and permission of the instructor.
Offered through the Penn Language Center. A continuation of the material offered in KORN 481:
Advanced Business Korean I. Students continue to closely follow the current topics of business and
financial markets of Korea by actively participating in discussions, research, and presentations.

OTHER ASIAN LANGUAGE COURSES (ALAN)
110. Elementary Vietnamese I & II. (C) Nguyen.Prerequisite(s): For the second semester, completion
of the first semester or permission of the instructor. Offered through the Penn Language Center.
An introduction to the language of North and South Vietnam. Instruction includes reading, writing,
speaking and listening.
120. Beginning Filipino I & II. (E) Juliano.Prerequisite(s): For the second semester, completion of the
first semester of ALAN 120 or permission of the instructor. Offered through the Penn Language
Center.
An introduction to the spoken and written Tagalog (Filipino) language. This will prepare and develop
students' basic skills in speaking, listening, reading and writing Filipino at its beginning level.
230. Intermediate Thai I & II. (E) Staff.Prerequisite(s): The second semester of ALAN130 or
permission of the instructor. For the second semester, completion of the first semester or permission
of the instructor. Offered through the Penn Language Center.
A continuation of ALAN 130, the spoken and written Thai language.
130. Beginning Thai I & II. (E) Staff.Prerequisite(s): For the second semester, completion of the first
semester or permission of the instructor. Offered through the Penn Language Center.
An introduction to the spoken and written Thai language.
210. Intermediate Vietnamese I & II. (C) Nguyen.Prerequisite(s): ALAN 110 or equivalent. For the
second semester, completion of the first semester or permission of the instructor. Offered through the
Penn Language Center.
A continuation of ALAN 110, the written and spoken language of Vietnam.
220. Intermediate Filipino I & II. (E) Juliano.Prerequisite(s): For the second semester, completion of
the first semester of ALAN 220 or permission of the instructor. Offered through the Penn Language
Center.
A continuation of ALAN 120, the spoken and written Tagalog (Filipino) language. This course will
develop the communicative competence of the students in handling limited communicative tasks,
reading simple connected texts and writing short dialogues.
121. (EALC521) Chinese Poetry & Prose: In translation. (A) Mair.
A wide variety of poetic & prose genres from the earliest times to the 19th century is introduced
through English translation. A few selections will also be studied in Chinese characters with romanized
transcriptions. There are no prerequisites for this course.

Page 40 of 41

EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES AND CIVILIZATIONS
(AS) {EALC}
131. (EALC531) Introduction to Classical Chinese Thought. (K) History & Tradition Sector. All
classes. Goldin.
This course is intended as an introduction to the foundational thinkers of Chinese civilization, who
flourished from the fifth to the second centuries B.C. No knowledge of Chinese is presumed, and there
are no prerequisites, although EALC 001 (Introduction to Chinese Civilization) is recommended.
Graduate students may take this course as EALC 531 and should see the instructor to discuss
requirements for graduate credit. (Undergraduates must enroll in the courses as EALC 131.)

Page 41 of 41

