ENGINEERING AND APPLIED SCIENCE
(EG) {EAS}
102. Product Engineering Basics. (C)
The course targets non-engineering majors interested in understanding engineering approaches to
product fabrication. The course covers a broad variety of engineering topics including mechanical,
electrical, computer and material science. Many of these topics would normally be full courses in
themselves. This course intends to teach familiarity with a focus on hands-on practice as applied to
products. Students will briefly use equipment such as MTS materials testing machines, mills, lathes,
oscilloscopes, laser cutters, photodiodes, motors, servos, microcomputers as well as engineering
software such as Solidworks, C compilers, Labview, Matlab, and Cambridge Engineering Selector. The
class concludes with independent projects.
125. (CIS 125) Technology and Policy. (C)
Have you ever wondered why sharing music and video generates such political and legal
controversies? Is information on your PC safe and should law enforcement be able to access
information you enter on the Web? Will new devices allow tracking of your every move and every
purchase? CIS 125 is focused on developing an understanding of existing and emerging technologies,
along with the political, societal and economic impacts of those technologies. The technologies are
spread across a number of engineering areas and each of them raise issues that are of current
concern or are likely to be a future issue.
203. Engineering Ethics. (C)
The practice of engineering requires more than creativity, diligence, and technical knowledge: it
demands the tools to manage the conflicting needs of clients, managers, and the public; an ability to
act responsibly when problems arise; and, above all, strong communication skills. This course will
examine the major ethical issues associated with engineering practice while enhancing students'
technical writing. Through the study of important case studies like the Great Molasses Flood, the
Space Shuttle Challenger disaster, and the Deepwater Horizon oil spill, we will learn about the
responsibilities of engineering professionals, as well as the causes and consequences of
technological failure.
205. Applications of Scientific Computing. (C) Prerequisite(s): Prior exposure to computing via
courses such as EAS 105, CIS 110, or ESE 112. Math 114, Sophomore standing.
This course will discuss a number of canonical problems and show how numerical methods are used
to solve them. Lectures will introduce the underlying theory and the relevant numerical methods.
Students will be expected to implement solutions to the problems using MATLAB. The course will use
the visualization capabilities of MATLAB to provide students with a geometric interpretation of the key
ideas underlying the numerical methods. Topics to be covered will include: The solution of systems of
linear systems equations with application to problems such as force balance analysis and global
illumination computation. Representing and computing coordinate transformations with applications to
problems in graphics, vision and robotics. Transform Coding with applications to the analysis of audio
signals and image compression. Analysis of variance and the search for low dimensional
representations for high dimensional data sets egs. Google's PageRank algorithm. Least Squares
model fitting with applications to data analysis. Analysis of linear dynamical systems with applications
to understanding the modes of vibration of mechanical systems. The analysis of stochastic systems
governed by state transition matrices.
210. Introduction to Nanotechnology. (A)

Page 1 of 11

ENGINEERING AND APPLIED SCIENCE
(EG) {EAS}
301. (EAS 505) Climate Policy and Technology. (C)
The course will exam Pacala and Socolow's hypothesis that "Humanity already possesses the
fundamental scientific, technical and industrial know-how t solve the carbon and climate problem for
the next half-century." Fifteen "climate stabilization wedges" i.e., strategies that each have the
potential to reduce carbon emissions by 1 billion ons per year by 2054, will be examined in detail.
Technology and economics will be reviewed. Socio-political barriers to mass-scale implementation will
be discussed. Pacala and Socolow note "Every element in this portfoloio has passed beyond the
laboratory bench and demonstration project; many are already implemented somewhere at full
industrial scale".
L/R 303. (BE 303) Ethics, Social, and Professional Responsibility for Engineers. (A)
Provides an overview of the ethical, social, and professional responsibilities of engineers, as
engineering professionals, as members of engineering organizations and as investigators in research.
The course will make extensvie use of student group presentations and in the analysis of cases based
on real-world problems with ethical dimensions, many drawn from current news. The case studies will
vary from year to year, but will be chosen to be relevant to studens interested in different careers in
engineering, including research.
306. (EAS 506) Electricity and Systems Markets. (C)
The course discusses the existing electricity system from technical, economic, and policy
perspectives. Basic power system engineering will be reviewed early in the course. Generation,
transmission, distribution, and end-use technologies and economics will be discussed. Additional
topics will include system operation, industry organization, government regulation, the evolution of
power markets, environmental policy, and emerging technologies.
400. (EAS 500) Technical Communication in Engineering Practice. (C) Prerequisite(s): SEAS
undergraduates must have already fulfilled their SEAS Writing Requirement.
Students will learn methods and approaches for written technical communication within the
engineering environment. These include strategies for maximum effectiveness in writing technical
documentation, reports, instructions, and proposals. Assignments will include self-editing and peer
editing techniques, as well as strategies to effectively mentor other writers.
401. (EAS 501) Energy and Its Impacts: Technology, Environment, Economics, Sustainability.
(A) Any University student interested in energy and its impacts, who is a Junior or Senior. Students
taking the course as EAS 501 will be given assignments commensurate with graduate standing.
The objective is to introduce students to one of the most dominating and compelling areas of human
existence and endeavor: energy, with its foundations in technology, from a quantitative sustainability
viewpoint with its association to economics and impacts on environment and society. This introduction
is intended both for general education and awareness and for preparation for careers related to this
field, with emphasis on explaining the technological foundation. The course spans from basic
principles to applications. A review of energy consumption, use, and resources; environmental
impacts, sustainability and design of sustainable energy systems; introductory aspects of energy
economics and carbon trading; methods of energy analysis; forecasting; energy storage; electricity
generation and distribution systems (steam and gas turbine based power plans, fuel cells), fossil fuel
energy (gas, oil, coal) including nonconventional types (shale gas and oil, oil sands, coalbed and tightsand gas), nuclear energy wastes: brief introduction to renewable energy use: brief introduction to
solar, wind, hydroelectric, geothermal, biomass; energy for buildings, energy for transportation (cars,
aircraft, and ships); prospects for future energy systems: fusion power, power generation in space.
Students interested in specializing in one or two energy topics can do so by choosing them as their
course project assignments.

Page 2 of 11

ENGINEERING AND APPLIED SCIENCE
(EG) {EAS}
499. Senior Capstone Project. (C)
The Senior Capstone Project is required for all BAS degree students, in lieu of the senior design
course. The Capstone Project provides an opportunity for the student to apply the theoretical ideas
and tools learned from other courses. The project is usually applied, rather than theoretical, exercise,
and should focus on a real world problem related to the career goals of the student. The one-semester
project may be completed in either the fall or sprong term of the senior year, and must be done under
the supervision of a sponsoring faculty member. To register for this course, the student must submit a
detailed proposal, signed by the supervising professor, and the student's faculty advisor, to the Office
of Academic Programs two weeks prior to the start of the term.
402. (EAS 502) Renewable Energy and Its Impacts: Technology, Environment, Economics,
Sustainability. (B) Prerequisite(s): Junior Standing.
The objective is to introduce students to the major aspects of renewable energy, with its foundations in
technology, association to economics, and impacts on ecology and society. This introduction is
intended both for general education and awareness and for preparation for careers related to this field.
The course spans from basic principles to applications. A review of solar, wind, biomass, hydroelectric,
geothermal energy, and prospects for future energy systems such as renewable power generation in
space.
403. (EAS 503) Energy Systems and Policy. (C)
This is a survey course that will examine the current U.S. energy industry, from production to
consumption, and its impacts on local, regional, and the global environment. The course will seek to
provide a fuller understanding of existing energy systems, ranging from technical overviews of each, a
review of industry organization, and an exploration of the well-established policy framework each
operates within. Near-term demands upon each energy supply system will be discussed, with
particular focus on environmental constraints. Policy options facing each energy industry will be
reviewed.
449. (IPD 549) Product Development in Entrepreneurial Ventures. (B)
A product is any artifact, service or experience for which a buyer is willing to pay. Product Design &
Development is at the core of entrepreneurship. Though in modern mythology it is a solitary effort by a
passionate individual, entrepreneurship is frequently more successful when pursued in an
interdisciplinary environment. Though it rarely requires the greatest time investment, concentration of
personnel, the majority of the funding or even the greatest depth of expertise to accomplish, excellent
product design can be the difference between a successful and failed venture. A poorly designed
"product "can prevent a venture from being successful. An excellently designed product can make a
competent business plan much more successful. A well defined and designed product solution will
create differentiation, and can not only meet customer expectation but can create desirability. Through
the review and discussion of case studies, lecture subjects, guest lecturers, field trips, and a semester
long interdisciplinary team project, this class will provide insight into the problem identification and
product design processes, user needs research, intellectual property research, experience design,
Industrial Design, Interface Design, brand development and product centric fundraising processes.
500. (EAS 400) Technical Communication in Engineering Practice. (C) This course is not intended
for non-native speakers of English and will not address their specific language needs. Students whose
native language is not English should register for EAS 510.
Students will learn methods and approaches for written technical communication within the
engineering environment. These include strategies for maximum effectiveness in writing technical
documentation, reports, instructions, and proposals. Assignments will include self-editing and peer
editing techniques, as well as strategies to effectively mentor other writers.

Page 3 of 11

ENGINEERING AND APPLIED SCIENCE
(EG) {EAS}
501. (EAS 401) Energy and its Impacts: Technology, Environment, Economics, Sustainability..
(A) Any university student interested in energy and its impacts, who is a graduate student or who is
an undergraduate Junior or Senior seeking graduate course credit. Students taking the course as EAS
501 will be given assignments commensurate with graduate standing.
The objective is to introduce students to one of the most dominating and compelling areas of human
existence and endeavor: energy, with its foundations in technology, from a quantitative sustainability
viewpoint with its association to economics and impacts on environment and society. This introduction
is intended both for general education and awareness and for preparation for careers related to this
field, with emphasis on explaining the technological foundation. The course spans from basic
principles to applications. A review of energy consumption, use, and resources; environmental
impacts, sustainability and design of sustainable energy systems; introductory aspects of energy
economics and carbon trading; methods of energy analysis; forecasting; energy storage; electricity
generation and distribution systems (steam and gas turbine based power plans, fuel cells), fossil fuel
energy (gas, oil, coal) including nonconventional types (shale gas and oil, oil sands, coalbed and tightsand gas), nuclear energy wastes: brief introduction to renewable energy use: brief introduction to
solar, wind, hydroelectric, geothermal, biomass; energy for buildings, energy for transportation (cars,
aircraft, and ships); prospects for future energy systems: fusion power, power generation in space.
Students interested in specializing in one or two energy topics can do so by choosing them as their
course project assignments.
502. (EAS 402) Renewable Energy and Its Impacts: Technology, Environment, Economics,
Sustainability.. (B)
The objective is to introduce students to the major aspects of renewable energy, with its foundations in
technology, association to economics, and impacts on ecology and society. This introduction is
intended both for general education and awareness and for preparation for careers related to this field.
The course spans from basic principles to applications. A review of solar, wind, biomass, hydroelectric,
geothermal energy, and prospects for future energy systems such as renewable power generation in
space.
506. (EAS 306) Electricity and Systems Markets. (B)
The course discusses the existing electricity system from technical, economic, and policy
perspectives. Basic power system engineering will be reviewed early in the course. Generation,
transmission, distribution, and end-use technologies and economics will be discussed. Additional
topics will include system operation, industry organization, government regulation, the evolution of
power markets, environmental policy, and emerging technologies.
503. (EAS 403) Energy Systems and Policy. (C)
This is a survey course that will examine the current U.S. energy industry, from production to
consumption, and its impacts on local, regional, and the global environment. The course will seek to
provide a fuller understanding of existing energy systems, ranging from technical overviews of each, a
review of industry organization, and an exploration of the well-established policy framework each
operates within. Near-term demands upon each energy supply system will be discussed, with
particular focus on environmental constraints.

Page 4 of 11

ENGINEERING AND APPLIED SCIENCE
(EG) {EAS}
505. (EAS 301) Climate Policy and Technology. (C)
The course will exam Pacala and Socolow's hypothesis that "Humanity already possesses the
fundamental scientific, technical and industrial know-how t solve the carbon and climate problem for
the next half-century." Fifteen "climate stabilization wedges" i.e., strategies that each have the
potential to reduce carbon emissions by 1 billion ons per year by 2054, will be examined in detail.
Technology and economics will be reviewed. Socio-political barriers to mass-scale implementation will
be discussed. Pacala and Socolow note "Every element in this portfoloio has passed beyond the
laboratory bench and demonstration project; many are already implemented somewhere at full
industrial scale".
507. Intellectual Property and Business Law for Engineers. (C)
Engineers are often on the front line of innovation. The goal of this course is to introduce engineering
students to the basics of Intellectual property (IP) and business laws that they will encounter
throughout their careers. Understanding these laws is critical for the protection of IP and for the
creation and success of high-tech start-up ventures. Market advantage in large part springs from a
company's IP. Without legal protection and correct business formation, proprietary designs, processes,
and inventions could be freely used by competitors, ruining market advantage. A basic understanding
of IP laws, contractual transactions, employment agreements, business structures, and debt-equity
financing will help engineering students to become effective employees or entrepreneurs, to acquire
investors, and to achieve success. Though open to students of all disciplines, the course will use case
studies particular relevance to students of engineering and applied science.
510. Technical Communication and Academic Wrting for Non-native Speakers of English. (B)
Graduate students whose native language is English, but who would benefit from a course in
Technical Communication, should take EAS 500.
Students will improve the grammar, word choice and organization of their professional writing by
completing weekly writing assignments and a full-length research paper. Students will also give short
oral presentations and receive feedback on pronunciation, wording, grammar and organization.
512. Engineering Negotiation. (C)
The goal of this course is to teach students of engineering and applied science to be effective
negotiators. It aims to improve the way these students communicate i virtually any human interaction.
The course intends to improve the ability of engineers and other technology disciplines to gain more
support more quickly for projects, researc product and services development, and marketing. For
those wanting to be entrepreneurs o r intrapreneurs, the course is designed essentially to find the
most value possible in starting up and running companies. Based on Professor Diamond's innovative
and renowned model of negotiation, it is intended to assist those for whom technical expertise is not
enough to persuade others, internally and externally, to provide resources, promotions and project
approvals; or to resolve disputes, solve problems and gain more opportunities.
Rejecting the 40-year-old notions of power, leverage and logic, the course focuses on persuasion by
making better human connections, uncovering perceptions and emotions, and structuring agreements
to be both collaborative and fair. This course is entrepreneurial in nature and can provide many times
more value than traditional persuasion. The Getting More book has sold more than 1 million copies
around the world and is also used by universities, corporations (Google), and U.S. Special Operations
(SEALs, Green Berets, Special Forces, Marines) to save lives and reduce conflict. From the first day,
students will do interactive cases based their own engineering-related problems and based on current
problems in the news. There will be diagnostics enabling every student to assess his/her skill and
improvements.

Page 5 of 11

ENGINEERING AND APPLIED SCIENCE
(EG) {EAS}
545. (IPD 545) Engineering Entrepreneurship I. (C) Prerequisite(s): Third or Fourth year or Graduate
standing.
Engineers and scientists create and lead great companies, hiring managers when and where needed
to help execute their vision. Designed expressly for students having a keen interest in technological
innovation, this course investigates the roles of inventors and founders in successful technology
ventures. Through case studies and guest speakers, we introduce the knowledge and skills needed to
recognize and seize a high-tech entrepreneurial opportunity - be it a product or service - and then
successfully launch a startup or spin-off company. The course studies key areas of intellectual
property, its protection and strategic value; opportunity analysis and concept testing; shaping
technology driven inventions into customer-driven products; constructing defensible competitive
strategies; acquiring resources in the form of capital, people and strategic partners; and the founder's
leadership role in an emerging high-tech company. Throughout the course emphasis is placed on
decisions faced by founders, and on the sequential risks and determinants of success in the early
growth phase of a technology venture. The course is designed for, but not restricted to, students of
engineering and applied science and assumes no prior business education.
595. Foundations of Leadership. (C)
The goal of EAS 595 is to increase your capacity to effectively lead throughout your career and
wherever you find yourself in an organization. This involves understanding and learning about yourself
and about working effectively with others. The course starts with an identification of values, strengths,
preferences and passions. It then proceeds with the personal and interpersonal and moves through
the strategic aspects o f leadership by bringing together aspects of management science, social
psychology, psychology of personality and behavioral economics. Topics include teamwork and team
dynamics, identifying life's goals and dreams , decision making, valuing differences, understanding the
dynamics of influence, using power with integrity, giving and receiving feedback, leading change, and
discovering where we can make our contribution.
546. Engineering Entrepreneurship II. (C) Prerequisite(s): EAS 545.
This course is the sequel to EAS 545 and focuses on the planning process for a new technology
venture. Like its prerequisite, the course is designed expressly for students of engineering and applied
science having a keen interest in technological innovation. Whereas EAS 545 investigates the
sequential stages of engineering entrepreneurship from the initial idea through the early growth phase
of a startup company, EAS 546 provides hands-on experience in developing a business plan for such
a venture. Working in teams, students prepare and present a comprehensive business plan for a hightech opportunity. The course expands on topics from EAS 545 with more in-depth attention to: industry
and marketplace analysis; competitive strategies related to high-tech product/service positioning,
marketing, development and operations; and preparation of sound financial plans. Effective written and
verbal presentation skills are emphasized throughout the course. Ultimately, each team presents its
plan to a distinguished panel of recognized entrepreneurs, investors and advisors from the high-tech
industry.
590. Commercializing Information Technology. (C)
EAS 590 provides real world, hands-on learning on what it's like to actually start a high-tech company.
We do that by using the Lean LaunchPad framework for Web start-ups. This class is not about how to
write a business plan. Instead you will be getting your hands dirty talking to customers, partners,
competitors, as you encounter the chaos and uncertainty of how a start-up actually works.
EAS 590 provides real world, hands-on learning on what it's like to actually start a high-tech
company. We do that by using the Lean LaunchPad framework for Web start-ups. This class is not
about how to write a business plan. Instead you will be getting your hands dirty talking to customers,
partners, competitors, as you encounter the chaos and uncertainty of how a start-up actually works.

Page 6 of 11

ENGINEERING AND APPLIED SCIENCE
(EG) {EAS}
591. Leading Technology Teams.
Engineers routinely work in teams collaborating with experts from multiple fields to address
increasingly large complex problems/opportunities. EAS 591, Leading Technology Teams, focuses on
the dynamics of innovative, interdisciplinary, cross-functional teams. We examine ways to improve
team performance by exploring technology leadership issues from multiple perspectives (i.e., the
individual, the team, and the organization). Developing skills to be an effective technology team
member, leader, and/or sponsor will provide you with a competitive advantage, not only for getting
your first job but also for success throughout your career.
898. CPT Research Practicum.. (C)
SM 900. Resp Conduct Res Eng. (C)
101. Introduction to Engneering. (A)
This course is intended to introduce students to the field of engineering. It will expose students to the
engineering disciplines through hands-on laboratory experiences. In addition, the course will provide
tutorials on how to use important software packages as well as a "Professional Preparation" module
through studies of communication (writing and speaking skills), ethics, leadership and teamwork. This
course is ideal for any freshman interested in exploring the possibility of studying engineering at Penn.
The course counts as as a engineering requirement in SEAS.
212. Concepts in Micro- and Nanotechnology. (C) Prerequisite(s): Math 104 and Physics 93/140 (or
higher), or permission of the instructor.
Seminar/Lecture course on micro- and nanotechnology intended for nonspecialists. This course will
discuss how very small structures and devices, as well as systems comprising these devices, are
fabricated and characterized, with application examples from microelectronics,
microelectromechanical systems, and quantum devices and systems. Current societal and ethical
implications of micro- and nanotechnology, as well as creation and exploitation of commercial
opportunities, will be discussed.
503. Engineering in Oil, Gas and Coal, from Productin to End Use. (C)
While conventional wisdom is that the world is running out of fossil fuels, technical advances such as
deep water production, directional drilling, hydrofracturing, and the refining of non-conventional crude
oil sources has increased the resource base significantly and there are well over 100 years of
reserves of oil, natural gas and coal. The effect of technology advances has been most profound in the
United States, where net energy imports are projected to fall to 12% of consumption by 2020.
Excellent, highly technical careers are available in these industries, with opportunities to reduce their
impact on the environment and in particular on climate change. The course will cover engineering
technology in oil, natural gas and coal from production through end use. It will equip graduating
students with the knowledge to contribute in these industries and to participate in informed debate
about them
L/R 251. Analytical Methods for Engineering. (B) Prerequisite(s): MATH 240 or equivalent along
with sophomore standing in SEAS, or permission of the instructor(s).
This course introduces students to physical models and mathematical methods that are widely
encountered in various branches of engineering. Illustrative examples are used to motivate
mathematical topics including ordinary and partial differential equations, Fourier analysis, eigenvalue
problems, and stability analysis. Analytical techniques that yield exact solutions to problems are
developed when possible, but in many cases, numerical calculations are employed using programs
such as Matlab and Maple. Students will learn the importance of mathematics in engineering.

Page 7 of 11

ENGINEERING AND APPLIED SCIENCE
(EG) {EAS}
375. Biological Data Science I - Fundamentals of Biostatistics. (C) Prerequisite(s): Sophomores
and Juniors only.
The purpose of this course is to provide students with skills to analyze and interpret small and large
biological data sets. Fundamentals in probability and statistics will be taught through the use of
homework problems, case studies and projects focused on computational analysis of biological data.
Topics covered include: Populations and samples; random variable; discrete and continuous probability
distributions; exploratory data analysis; descriptive statistics; confidence intervals; expectations;
variances; central limit theorem; independence; hypothesis testing; fitting probability models; pvalues;
goodness-of-fit tests; correlation coefficients; non-parametric tests; ANOVA; linear regression;
bootstrapping; and maximum likelihood estimation.
512. Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos. (C) Prerequisite(s): MATH 240 or ENM 510, Senior or
Master's standing in engineering.
This course covers the essential mathematics behind continuous and discrete nonlinear dynamical
systems with applications in Physics, Biology, Chemistry and Engineering. It covers one-dimensional,
two-dimensional, three-dimensional and n-dimensional flows for continuous systems and onedimensional flows for discrete systems. It also covers Cantor's set theory and Fractals.
220. Discrete Dynamical Systems and Chaos. (C) Prerequisite(s): MATH 103, MATH 104 and MATH
114 (Calculus of a Single Variable and some knowledge of Comples Numbers).
This course will cover the mathematics behind the dynamics of discrete systems and difference
equations. Topics include: Real function iteration, Converging and Diverging sequences, Periodic and
chaotic sequences, Fixed-point, periodic-point and critical-point theories, Bifurcations and perioddoubling transitions to chaos, Symbolic dynamics, Sarkovskii's theorem, Fractals, Complex function
iterations, Julia and Mandelbrot sets. In the past, mathematics was learned only through theoretical
means. In today's computer age, students are now able to enjoy mathematics through experimental
means. Using numerous computer projects, the student will discover many properties of discrete
dynamical systems. In addition, the student will also get to understand the mathematics behind the
beautiful images created by fractals. Throughout the course, applications to: Finance, Population
Growth, Finding roots, Differential Equations, Controls, Game and Graph Problems, Networks,
Counting Problems and other real-world systems will be addressed.
321. Engineering Statistics. (C)
This course covers the topics in probability and statistics with an emphasize on the application of
probability theories and statistical techniques to practical engineering problems. Mathematical
derivations of theorems will be presented whenever it is necessary to illustrate the concepts involved,
however.
L/R 427. (MEAM527) Finite Elements and Applications. (A) Prerequisite(s): MATH 241 or ENM 251
and PHYS 151.
The objective of this course is to equip students with the background needed to carry out finite
elements-based simulations of various engineering problems. The first part of the course will outline
the theory of finite elements. The second part of the course will address the solution of classical
equations of mathematical physics such as Laplace, Poisson, Helmholtz, the wave and the Heat
equations. The third part of the course will consist of case studies taken from various areas of
engineering and the sciences on topics that require or can benefit from finite element modeling. The
students will gain hand-on experience with the multi-physics, finite element package FemLab.

Page 8 of 11

ENGINEERING AND APPLIED SCIENCE
(EG) {EAS}
L/R 502. Numerical Methods and Modeling. (B) Sinno.Prerequisite(s): Knowledge of a computer
language, Math 240 and 241; ENM 510 is highly recommended; or their equivalents.
Numerical modeling using effective algorithms with applications to problems in engineering, science,
and mathematics, and is intended for graduate and advanced undergraduate students in these areas.
Interpolation and curve fitting, numerical integration, solution of ordinary and partial differential
equations by finite difference, and finite element methods. Includes use of representative numerical
software packages such as MATLAB PDE Toolbox.
520. Principles and Techniques of Applied Math I. (A) Prerequisite(s): Basic theory of ordinary and
partial differential equations.
This course is targeted to engineering PhD students in all areas. It will focus on the stud of linear
spaces (both finite and infinite dimensional) and of operators defined on such spaces. This course will
also show students how powerful methods developed by the study of linear spaces can be used to
systematically solve problems in engineering. The emphasis in this course will not be on abstract
theory and proofs but on techniques that can be used to solve problems. Some examples of
techniques that will be studied include, Fourier eries, Green's functions for ordinary and partial
differential operators, eigenvalue problems for ordinary differential equations, singular value
decomposition of matrices, etc.
503. Introduction to Probability and Statistics. (A) Prerequisite(s): MATH 240 or equivalent.
Introduction to combinatorics: the multiplication rule, the pigeonhole principle, permutations,
combinations, binomial and multinomial coefficients, recurrence relations, methods of solving
recurrence relations, permutations and combinations with repetitions, integer linear equation with unit
coefficients, distributing balls into urns, inclusion-exclusion, an introduction to probability. Introduction
to Probability: sets, sample setsevents, axioms of probability, simple results, equally likely outcomes,
probability as a continuous set function and probability as a measure of belief, conditional probability,
independent events, Bayes' formula, inverting probability trees. Random Variables: discrete and
continuous, expected values, functions of random variables, variance. Some Special Discrete Random
Variables: Bernoulli, Binomial, Poisson, Geometric, Pascal (Negative Binomial) Hypergeometric and
Poisson.
Some Special Continuous Random Variables: Uniform, Exponential, Gamma, Erlang, Normal, Beta
and Triangular. Joint distribution functions, minimum and maximum of independent random variables,
sums of independent random variables, reproduction properties. Properties of Expectation: sums of
random variables, covariance, variance of sums and correlations, moment-generating function. Limit
theorems: Chebyshev's inequality, law of large numbers and the central-limit theorem. Extra Topics:
Generating random numbers and simulation, Monte-Carlo methods, The Poisson Process and
Queueing Theory, Stochastic Processes and Regular Markov Chains, Absorbing Markov Chains and
Random Walks.
510. Foundations of Engineering Mathematics - I. (A) Prerequisite(s): MATH 240, MATH 241 or
equivalent.
This is the first course of a two semester sequence, but each course is self contained. Over the two
semesters topics are drawn from various branches of applied mathematics that are relevant to
engineering and applied science. These include: Linear Algebra and Vector Spaces, Hilbert spaces,
Higher-Dimensional Calculus, Vector Analysis, Differential Geometry, Tensor Analysis, Optimization
and Variational Calculus, Ordinary and Partial Differential Equations, Initial-Value and Boundary-Value
Problems, Green's Functions, Special Functions, Fourier Analysis, Integral Transforms and Numerical
Analysis. The fall course emphasizes the study of Hilbert spaces, ordinary and partial differential
equations, the initial-value, boundary-value problem, and related topics.

Page 9 of 11

ENGINEERING AND APPLIED SCIENCE
(EG) {EAS}
511. Foundations of Engineering Mathematics - II. (B) Prerequisite(s): ENM 510 or equivalent.
Vector Analysis: space curves, Frenet - Serret formulae, vector theorems, reciprocal systems, co and
contra variant components, orthogonal curvilinear systems. Matrix theory: Gauss-Jordan elimination,
eigen values and eigen vectors, quadratic and canonical forms, vector spaces, linear independence,
Triangle and Schwarz inequalities, n-tuple space.Variational calculus: Euler-Lagrange equation, Finite
elements, Weak formulation, Galerkin technique, FEMLAB. Tensors: Einstein summation, tensors of
arbitrary order, dyads and polyads, outer and inner products, quotient law, metric tensor, Euclidean
and Riemannian spaces, physical components, covariant differentiation, detailed evaluation of
Christoffel symbols, Ricci's theorem, intrinsic differentiation, generalized acceleration, Geodesics.
L/R 521. Principles and Techniques of Applied Math II. (B)
This course is a continuatin of ENM 520 (or equivalent) and deals with classcial methods in applied
mathematics. The topics to be covered include: Functions of a Complex Variable, Partial Differential
Equations, Asymptotic and Perturbawtin Methods, and Convex Analysis and Variational Methods.
540. Topics In Computational Science and Engineering. (M) Prerequisite(s): Background in
ordinary and partial differential equations; proficiency in a programming language such as MATLAB, C,
or Fortran.
This course is focused on techniques for numerical solutions of ordinary and partial differential
equations. The content will include: algorithms and their analysis for ODEs; finite element analysis for
elliptic, parabolic and hyperbolic PDEs; approximation theory and error estimates for FEM.
600. Functional Analysis. (C) Prerequisite(s): ENM 500, ENM 501 or ENM 510, ENM 511 or
equivalent.
This course teaches the fundamental concepts underlying metric spaces, normed spaces, vector
spaces, and inner-product spaces. It begins with a discussion of the ideals of convergence and
completeness in metric spaces and then uses these ideas to develop the Banach fixed-point theorem
and its applications to linear equations, differential equations and integral equations. The course
moves on to a study of normed spaces, vector spaces, and Banach spaces and operators defined on
vector spaces, as well as functional defined between vector spaces and fields. The course then moves
to the study of inner product spaces, Hilbert spaces, orthogonal complements, direct sums, and
orthonormal sets. Applications include the study of Legendre, Hermite, Laguerre, and Chebyshev
polynomials, and approximation methods in normed spaces. The course then concludes with a study
of eigenvalues and eigenspaces of linear operators and spectral theory in finite-dimensional vector
spaces.
700. Biotechnology Seminar. (C)
This is a seminar course where students hear different perspectives in the biotechnology and
pharmaceutical industry. Speakers will discuss their experiences in business startups, technology
transfer, bioinformatics, pharmaceutical houses, and academics.

Page 10 of 11

ENGINEERING AND APPLIED SCIENCE
(EG) {EAS}
601. Special Topics in Engineering Mathematics - Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos. (B)
Prerequisite(s): Permission of Instructor.
This course covers the essential mathematics behind continuous and discrete nonlinear dynamical
systems with applications in Physics, Biology, Chemistry and Engineering. It covers one-dimensional,
two-dimensional, three-dimensional and n-dimensional flows for continuous systems and onedimensional flows for discrete systems. It also covers Cantor's set theory and Fractals.

BIOTECHNOLOGY (BIOT)
599. Biot Independent Study. (C)
105. Introduction to Scientific Computing.
This course will provide an introduction to computation and data analysis using MATLAB - an industry
standard programming and visualization environment. The course will cover the fundamentals of
computing including: variables, functions, decisions, iteration, and recursion. These concepts will be
illustrated through examples and assignments which show how computing is applied to various
scienti?c and engineering problems. Examples will be drawn from the simulation of physical and
chemical systems, the analysis of experimental data, Monte Carlo numerical experiments, image
processing, and the creation of graphical user interfaces. This course does not assume any prior
programming experience but will make use of basic concepts from calculus and Newtonian physics.
250. Energy Systems, Resources and Technology. (C) Prerequisite(s): Basic understanding of
chemistry and physics.
The course will present a comprehensive overview of the global demand for energy, and the resource
availability and technology used in its current and future supply. Through a personal energy audit,
students will be made aware of the extensive role that energy plays in modern life, both directly,
through electricity and transportation fuel, and indirectly in the manufacturing of goods they use. The
course will cover how that energy is supplied, the anticipated global growth in energy demand, the
resource availability and the role of science and technology in meeting that demand in a world
concerned about climate change. The roles of conservation, improved efficiency and renewable
energy in meeting future demand in a sustainable, environmentally benign way will be covered.
504. Fundamental Concepts in Nanotechnology. (C)
This is a Master's level course that seeks to teach the physics needed to begin a study of engineering
and science at the nanometer scale. Since the nanometer scale is so close to the quantum scale,
much of the course deals with an introduction to quantum mechanics but the course also includes
discussions in solid-state physics, electricity and magnetism and mechanics. The objective of the
course is to teach the physics that an engineering student would need to have in order to do
experimental work at the nanometer scale. In addition, this course will prepare the student to take
more advanced courses in the Nanotechnology Program.

NANOTECHNOLOGY (NANO)
597. Master's Thesis Research. (C)
599. Master's Independent Study. (C)

Page 11 of 11

