EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
183. AM WRTRS TO 1900.

Undergraduate Courses
Undergraduate students may not take intersession courses for credit.

General Education/Undergraduate Courses
SM 202. (URBS202) Urban Education. (B)
235. (GSWS235) Psychology of Women. (C) Staff.
Critical analyses of the psychological theories of female development, and introduction to feminist
scholarship on gender development and sexuality.
240. (AMCV240, URBS240) Education in American Culture. (C) Staff.
This course explores the relationships between forms of cultural production and transmission
(schooling, family and community socialization, peer group subcultures and media representations)
and relations of inequality in American society. Working with a broad definition of "education" as varied
forms of social learning, we will concentrate particularly on the cultural processes that produce as well
as potentially transform class, race, ethnic and gender differences and identities. From this vantage
point, we will then consider the role that schools can and/or should play in challenging inequalities in
America.
241. Educational Psychology. (C) Staff.
Current issues and research, stressing implications for educational practice. Topics include: behavioral
analysis, methods, curriculum objectives, intelligence tests, headstart programs, etc. Field experience
in schools is often included.
250. Learning from Children. (C) Staff.
This course is about looking at elementary school classrooms and understanding children's
experiences of school from a variety of perspectives, and from a variety of theoretical and
methodological lenses from which the student can interpret children's educational experiences. This
course is about developing the skills of observation, reflection, and analysis and to begin to examine
some implications for curriculum, teaching and schooling. This course requires you to spend time in an
elementary school classroom.
SM 323. (URBS323) Tutoring School: Theory and Practice. (A) Kasher, Jackie.
This course represents an opportunity for students to participate in academically-based community
service involving tutoring in a West Phila. public school. This course will serve a need for those
students who are already tutoring through the West Phila.Tutoring Project or other campus tutoring. It
will also be available to individuals who are interested in tutoring for the first time.

Page 1 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
SM 326. (URBS326) Tutoring in Urban Public Elementary Schools: A Child Development
Perspective. Fantuzzo.
The course provides an opportunity for undergraduate students to participate in academically based
community service learning. Student will be studying early childhood development and learning while
providing direct, one-to-one tutoring services to young students in Philadelphia public elementary
schools. The course will cover foundational dimensions of the cognitive and social development of
preschool and elementary school students from a multicultural perspective. The course will place a
special emphasis on the multiple contexts that influence children's development and learning and how
aspects of classroom environment (i.e., curriculum and classroom management strategies) can impact
children's achievement. Also, student will consider a range of larger issues impacting urban education
embedded in American society. The course structure has three major components: (1) lecture related
directly to readings on early childhood development and key observation and listening skills necessary
for effective tutoring, (2) weekly contact with a preschool or elementary school student as a volunteer
tutor and active consideration of how to enhance the student learning, and (3) discussion and
reflection of personal and societal issues related to being a volunteer tutor in a large urban public
school.
345. (GSWS344) Psychology of Personal Growth. (C) Staff.
Intellectual, emotional and behavioral development in the college years. Illustrative topics: developing
intellectual and social competence; developing personal and career goals; managing interpersonal
relationships; values and behavior. Recommended for submatriculation in Psychological Services
Master's Degree program.
360. Human Development. (C) Staff.
A life-span (infancy to adulthood) approach to development. Topics include: biological, physical, social
and cognitive basis of development. Films and guest speakers are often included.
463. (HIST463) The History of American Education. (B) Katz.
This course is a survey of the relationships between education and the history of American society.
The emphasis will be on social history: the interrelations between education and social structure,
demography, economic development, family patterns, reform movements, and other institutions.
414. Children's Literature. (A) Staff.
Theoretical and practical aspects of the study of literature for children. Students develop both wide
familiarity with children's books, and understanding of how children's literature fits into the elementary
school curriculum.
417. Reading/Language Arts in the Elementary School. (A) Prerequisite(s): EDUC 316, 317.
Corequisite(s): EDUC 419, 420.This course is open only to students officially admitted to the program
for preparation of elementary school teachers.
Second of a two-part course (see EDUC 317). The course focuses on the reading process, using
literature in the reading curriculum, language and cultural difference in the classroom, and evaluating
reading/language arts programs and progress. Students design and carry out reading lessons and
units, conduct informal reading assessments, and participate in in-class seminars.

Page 2 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
418. Teaching and Learning Mathematics in Elementary Schools. (A) Staff.
Students participating in this course will explore definitions of mathematics, theories of children's
mathematical learning, and issues of reform in mathematics education through consideration of
relevant content areas such as numeration, rational number operations, geometry, and probability and
statistics.
421. (ENVS421) Science in Elementary and Middle Schools. (B) Staff.
An intensive approach to current methods, curricula, and trends in teaching science as basic learning,
K-8. "Hands-on" activities based on cogent, current philosophical and psychological theories including:
S/T/S and gender issues. Focus on skill development in critical thinking. Content areas: living things,
the physical universe, and interacting ecosystems.

ECS-Education, Culture & Society 105
SM 503. (URBS546) Global Citizenship. (B) Hall.
This course examines the possibilities and limitations of conceiving of and realizing citizenship on a
global scale. Readings, guest lecturers, and discussions will focus on dilemmas associated with
addressing issues that transcend national boundaries. In particular, the course compares global/local
dynamics that emerge across different types of improvement efforts focusing on distinctive institutions
and social domains, including: educational development; human rights; humanitarian aid; free trade;
micro-finance initiatives; and the global environmental movement. The course has two objectives: to
explore research and theoretical work related to global citizenship, social engagement, and
international development; and to discuss ethical and practical issues that emerge in the local contexts
where development initiatives are implemented.
SM 506. Global Perspectives on Inequalities in Education. (B) Ghaffar-Kucher.
This course provides a conceptual framework for understanding various dimensions of inequality.
Through country case studies, the course takes a global perspective to explore how conceptions of
equality, equity, quality, and opportunity intersect with issues around race, class, and gender, and
inform debates around educational policy and practice.
SM 509. Liberalism & Multiculturalism -- Theory & Policy. (C) Ben-Porath.
This course is aimed at positioning education at the heart of the political-philosophical question of
justice. The aim to gain an understanding of the core issues we face when constructing policies to
advance equity, choice, and access and other just causes.
SM 511. Equality. (C) Ben-Porath.
'All men (or all humans) are created equal': What does this statement mean? What are we all equal in?
What should we be equal in? Do we have equal potential, equal dignity, equal worth? Must we have
equal resources, equal opportunities, equal status? In this class we will consider philosophical and
political approaches to the idea of equality. The education system's ability and commitment to respond
to claims of equality will be discussed. Must we treat all children the same? Or each child differently?
And if the latter, how does that constitute equality? Moreover, must we treat individuals or groups
equally? Educational and philosophical answers to these questions will be the focus of this seminar.

Page 3 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
514. Education in Developing Countries. (C) Wagner/Ghaffer-Kucher.Prerequisite(s): Prior graduate
work in related areas recommended.
In recent years the construct of "global development" has come under increasing scrutiny, leading
some scholars and practitioners to wonder whether development remains a useful concept. In this
course, we will actively engage in this debate through a survey of the development literature in the
field of education. We will examine theoretical frameworks and historical perspectives that will allow us
to develop a better understanding of what is meant by "development" as well as recognize how these
concepts relate to basic educational planning and practce in various international contexts.
The course will work from primary and secondary materials on theories,research, and applications
used to promote global develoment and basic education. Some programs are carried out by
multinational/bilateral agencies such as World Bank, Unicef, UNESCO, and USAID, while others are
undertaken by intermediary organizations (such as NGOs and universities) and local organizations or
individual specialists. Issues include a range of social, economic and political obstacles to the
provision of quality education. The goal of this course is to improve your understanding of how different
theories of education and development influence educational policy, priorities, and programs of
international, national, and local institutions.
518. Authority, Freedom, and Disciplinary Policies. (B) Goodman.
The course concentrates on the nature and justification of discipline. In particular, we focus on how
discipline becomes the expression of twin but conflicting premises of education: that children should
be encouraged to develop their critical intellectual capacities and autonomous decision-making -- read
freedom; that these ends cannot be achieved without the direction and control of teachers -- read
authority.
Students read classical works on freedom and authority (John Stuart Mill, Isaiah Berlin, Emile
Durkheim, John Dewey, C.S.Lewis) as well as more contemporary ones. In class we look at video clips
of different practices and discuss readings. Every student selects one type of disciplinary approach to
study in detail, inclusive of on-site visits. The seminar paper covers the source and nature of the
school's commitments, its theory of authority and freedom (implicit and explicit), illustrations of how
commitments are expressed (including discipline practices), and the student's reflections.
564. Moral Values and the Schools. (B) Goodman.
This course explores whether, and if so, how "values" should be taught in the schools by addressing
the following questions: What is unique about the domain of values? Is there, or should there be, a
corpus of shared personal and social values? What are the sources of values and how are they
transmitted across generations? If schools teach values, how do they address the problems
associated with specific codes? The problems of the absence of codes? The tensions between fidelity
to personal beliefs and to values of compromise, tolerance and cultural pluralism?
SM 524. Philosophical Aspects of Education Policy. (C) Ben-Porath.
This course, which is unofficially titled 'Justice goes to School' explores the philosophical or normative
foundations of educational policy decisions. School choice, standards-based reform, civic education,
children's and parents' rights, school finance reform - how do different arguments for these policies
view the role of schools in society? What are their concept of the person, and their view of the
educated person? We will consider arguments for and against a variety of contemporary educational
policies. Students are encouraged, if they are interested, to bring to class educational policy decision
that perplex or intrigue them.
544. School and Society in America. (C) Ingersoll/Ben-Porath..
This course reviews the major empirical and theoretical research from the social history, and social
theory on the development, organization and governance of American education, and the relationship
between schooling and the principal institutions and social structures of American society.

Page 4 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
547. (ANTH547, FOLK527, URBS547) Anthropology and Education. (C) Hall or Posecznick.
An introduction to the intent, approach, and contribution of anthropology to the study of socialization
and schooling in cross-cultural perspective. Education is examined in traditional, colonial, and complex
industrial societies.
570. Education and the American City. (B) Puckett.
Education and the American City centers on major trends and factors that have shaped cities and their
preK-16 school systems since the Second World War, including racial discrimination, migration and
immigration, suburbanization, deindustrialization, U.S. housing policy, social welfare policy, and urban
renewal.
576. (GSWS249, PHIL249) The Social & Political Philosophy of Education. (A) Detlefsen, K..
Is the purpose of education to allow individuals to better themselves by pursuing personal tastes and
interests, or should education be primarily aimed at creating good citizens or good members of a
group? Is there a way of reconciling these two aims? Assuming that adult relations with children are
inherently paternalistic, is it possible for children to be educated for future autonomy to pursue major
life goals free from such paternalistic control; and if so, how? How much, if any control over education
can be allocated to the state, even when this conflicts with the educational goals parents have for their
children? Such questions are especially relevant in multicultural or pluralistic societies in which some
groups within a liberal state are non-liberal. Should a liberal democratic state intervene in education to
ensure the development of children's personal autonomy, or must toleration of non-liberal groups
prevail even at the expense of children's autonomy?
SM 595. (PSCI545) POLITICS AND EDUCATION. (A) BEN-PORATH.
How is education a form of political action? In this course we look at the governance of schools, the
trust in them and their relations to socio-economic conditions in society, among other topics, using
research in education, political science, and political theory.
SM 596. International Early Childhood Policies and Programs. (A) Neuman, Michelle.
This course focuses on early childhood development research, policies, and practices in low and
middle-income countries. The first part of the course reviews the evidence for investing in young
children from economic, health, and education perspectives. The second part of the course discusses
current issues related to designing, implementing, and evaluating quality, contextually-appropriate
early childhood interventions.
SM 597. Policy Planning in International Educational Development: Theory and Practice. (B)
Neuman, Michelle.
This course focuses on education npolivy in low and middle-income countries. The first part examines
global policy frameworks and international institutions/actors that shape education reform efforts. The
second part covers the contexts, processes, and tools for national education policy planning. The third
part analyzes a series of current cross-national education policy issues.
SM 598. Interfaith Dialogue in Action. (B) Hall, Kathy & Kocher, Steve.
This ABCS course explores religious pluralism and interfaith dialogue and action on college
campuses. It brings together students with diverse faith commitments (including atheism) to engage
with and learn from one another in academic study, dialogue, and service.

Page 5 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
602. Youth Cultural Formations. (B) Staff.
This course explores anthropological perspectives on peer-based youth cultures. It explores how
educational institutions, media (fashion, music, magazines), and states shape youth cultures in crosscultural contexts through social processes such as capitalism, nationalism, and increasing
globalization. The course emphasizes ethnographies and histories which explore the relationship of
these wider social processes to the lived realities of young people, situated in class, gender, national
and race-specific contexts.
SM 646. Contextualizing the School to Prison Pipeline: Implications of History, Policy, and
Race. (B) Harper, Jessie.
The term school-to-prison pipeline typically refers to a disturbing trend in which punitive policies have
led to children being funneled out of schools and into the criminal justice system at an alarming rate.
This course:
1. Examines the historical context and policies that have contributed to the school-to-prison pipeline.
2. Explores the workings of contemporary racism, in particular, colorblind racism and its relationship
to education and corrections policies.
Discusses the outcomes of such policies and explores interventions for an alternate approach to
such policies.
611. Education, Development, and Globalization. (B) Ghaffar-Kucher.
This course will explore contemporary issues in international education. The emphasis will be on
exploring an emergent body of literature on contemporary processes of globalization in the field of
education. The course has a double goal: 1) to provide theoretical frameworks and historical
perspectives in order to develop an adequate understanding of 'globalization', and 2) to explore the
relevance and impact of globalization as a framework for understanding educational processes in
comparative and international contexts.
622. International Educational Development Program (IEDP) International Field Experience/
Internship. (G) Ghaffer-Kucher.Prerequisite(s): Required of (and limited to) IEDP students in order to
complete their Master's Degree.
Conceptual background on the role and utility of non-profit organizations in international educational
development, combined with 6-8 weeks of field experience working in a developing country, or with an
international organization that has programs in developing countries. The pre-fieldwork phase of the
coruse seeks to aquaint students with the stages of a project cycle and will introduce students to tools
and techniques employed by a variety of international development organizations. Students will work in
small groups on a technical proposal throughout the semester. For the fieldwork phase, students are
required to write multiple reports from the field.
638. The American High School. (B) Puckett.
This course looks at the role, organization and development of the American high school throughout
the twentieth century. The contemporary structure and function of the high school is a continuous
focus for analysis and comparison.
647. Linguistic Anthropology of Education. (B) Wortham.
This course introduces theoretical insights and empirical approaches from contemporary linguistic
anthropology and explores how these could be used to study topics of concern to educational
researchers -- focusing on how discourse partly constitutes culture, identity and learning.

Page 6 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
660. Qualitative Approaches to Program Evaluation in Urban Schools. Staff.Prerequisite(s): An
ethnography course is recommended.
Students will gain a historical overview of qualitative evaluation and an understanding of the variety of
approaches within the field. Students will learn about evaluation techniques, research design and data
analysis through a real case example in K-12 public education. Students will prepare journal entries
and propose a research design for evaluating a program using qualitative approaches.
SM 664. Participatory Educational Research in Global Perspective: Theory and Practice. (B)
Ravitch.
This course examines participatory models and frameworks in relation to international applied
educational development research. Through a critical examination of approaches to international
applied development research, the course examines real-world models of development research in
order to examine questions regarding the nature of knowledge, post-colonial histories, researcher
positionalities, and the relationships between concepts, theory, methodology, community, and identity.
Course focuses on participatory methodologies as cross-sector strategy frameworks for sustainable,
equitable, locally driven educational development efforts.
SM 673. Curriculum & Pedagogy in International Contexts. (B) Ghaffar-Kucher, Ameena.
This course explores the problems, issues, and approaches to teacher preparation and the
development of curricula and instructional materials, particularly (though not exclusively) in developing
country contexts through a seminar styled class and a hands-on semester long project.
682. Qualitative Modes of Inquiry. (C) Ravitch/Posecznick/Staff.
This course surveys the field of qualitative research and focuses on foundational philosophies of and
approaches to qualitative research. The course focuses on the stages of qualitative research including
the development of researchable questions, research designs, conceptual frameworks, methodological
stances, data collection and analysis and instrument design and implementation.
SM 695. Proseminar in International Educational Development. (G) Wagner.
The IEDP Proseminar covers the broad arena of international educational development. The course is
designed to provide an analytical perspective on applied research and policy as undertaken by UN,
donor and non-profit agencies, with a focus on developing countries. Several invited specialists will
participate in the course. This Proseminar is a required course for IEDP Masters students.
700. (ANTH707) Craft of Ethnography. (B) Hall.Prerequisite(s): Must have completed EDUC 721 or
equivalent introductory qualitative methods course.
This course is designed to follow after Ethnographic Research Methods (EDUC 721). In the
introductory course, students learned how to use qualitative methods in conducting a brief field study.
This advanced level course focuses on research design and specifically the craft of ethnographic
research. Students will apply what they learn in the course in writing a proposal for a dissertation
research project.

Page 7 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
721. (FOLK672, URBS672) Ethnographic Research Methods. (C) Hall/Wortham.Prerequisite(s):
This course is designed to follow after Qualitative Modes of Inquiry (EDUC 682) and as such it is
suggested that students have some background in qualitative methods before enrolling.
A course in ethnographic participant observational research; its substantive orientation, literature, and
methods. Emphasis is on the interpretive study of social organization and culture in educational
settings, formal and informal. Methods of data collection and analysis, critical review of examples of
ethnographic research reports, and research design and proposal preparation are among the topics
and activities included in this course.
703. Advanced Qualitative and Case Study Research. (B) Ravitch.Prerequisite(s): EDUC 682
Qualitative Modes of Inquiry.
This course explores epistemological and methodological choices and stances in qualitative research
as well as advanced research methods including qualitative research design and concept mapping,
sampling/participant selection, interviewing, coding and data analysis, instrument development and
triangulation techniques.
706. (ANTH704, FOLK706, URBS706) Culture/Power/Subjectivities. (A) Hall.Prerequisite(s): EDUC
547.
This doctoral level course will introduce students to a conceptual language and theoretical tools for
analyzing and explaining the complex intersection of racialized, ethnic, gendered, sexual, and classed
differences and asymmetrical social relations. The students will examine critically the interrelationships
between culture, power, and subjectivity through a close reading of classical and contemporary social
theory. Emphasis will be given to assessing the power of various theories for conceptualizing and
explaining mechanisms of social stratification as well as the basis of social order and processes of
social change.
710. Methods of Discourse Analysis. (L) Rymes/Wortham.Prerequisite(s): This course is designed
to follow after Qualitative Modes of Inquiry (EDUC 682) and as such it is suggested that students have
some background in qualitive methods before enrolling.
This course introduces several methodological approaches that have been developed to do discourse
analysis. The course intends primarily to provide students with various methodological tools for
studying naturally-occurring speech. Assignments include both reading and weekly data analysis
exercises.
727. Education, Culture and Society. (A) Ben-Porath.
This course surveys basic issues in the philosophical and social foundations of education, addressing
basic questions about the purpose of education, mostly through reading primary texts. Intended for
incoming doctoral students.
806. Narrating the Self. (B) Wortham.
This seminar explores, in some linguistic detail, how narrators can partly construct their selves while
telling autobiographical stories. The seminar addresses three questions: What is the structure of
narrative discourse? How might we construct ourselves by telling stories about ourselves? If narrative
is central to self-constructions, what is "the self"?

EDPL-Educational Policy

Page 8 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
519. The Evolution of Assessment: Classroom and Policy Uses. Supovitz.Prerequisite(s):
Permission needed from department. Masters students only.
This course explores the evolution and diverse uses of assessment in four major areas: the historical
roots of testing and the development of the acheivement testing industry; the rising interest and
exploration of alternative forms of assessment; how teachers employ a variety of assessments in their
classrooms; and how policymakers use assessment for decision-making and accountability purposes.
548. American Education Reform: History, Policy, Practice. (C) Puckett.
An examination of major trends, central tendencies, and turning points in twentieth- and early twentyfirst century American education reform, giving particular attention to contemporary education reforms,
e.g. NCLB, charter schools, portfolio management models of urban school governance, neoliberal
education agendas. This historical development of the federal role in American schooling is also
considered, as is the history of school desegregation.
559. Sociology of Education. (B) Ingersoll.
This course provides an overview of key theoretical perspectives and topics in the sociology of
education, including expansion of formal educational systems; the extent to which educational
systems contribute to or inhibit social mobility; inequality of educational inputs and outcomes by race,
social class, and gender; and the social organization of educational institutions, including sources of
authority, community, and alienation. The course includes both K-12 and higher education topics.
591. Applied Research Methods to Inform Policy and Practice. (C) Maynard.Prerequisite(s):
Permission needed from department.
The class is designed to provide students with the knowledge and tools to define relevant research
questions to guide program design and operations, as well as to guide policy development; to map
questions to appropriate methods of reserarch; to judge the quality of research evidence; and to
design strong analysis and evaluation strategies for various purposes. The primary, but not exclusive,
focus of the course is on education policy concerns.
601. Economic Aspects of Educational Policy. (C) Maynard.
This course has two main goals. One is to teach students to apply economic principals to analyze a
wide range of educational policy issues. The other is to provide students with a foundation in
contemporary education policy issues. The course is designed to address analytic issues relevant to a
wide range of educational professionals, including managers, policy makers, and evaluators. The
course will be divided into five units: (1) principles of economic analysis in the context of education
policy; (2) the economics of early care and education; (3) cost-effectiveness analysis; (4) human
capital investment; and (5) education finance.
707. U.S.School Policy and Reform. (A) Desimone.
Designed to increase knowledge of what works to improve public schools, what doesn't, and why.
Topics include accountability, turnaround and charter schools, Common Core Standards, and other
organizational, curricular, teacher and leader reforms. Focuses on how reforms are translated to the
classroom, and effects on districts, principals, teachers, and students.

Page 9 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
614. Child Development and Social Policy. (A) Fantuzzo.
The purpose of this course is to focus on major US social policies impacting our most vulnerable
subpopulations of children living in poverty. The class will explore how developmental science can
provide a broad conceptual framework to inform the construction of social policies for children and
evaluate their effectiveness. Since much of the social policy issues for children in the US public square
are currently hotly debated, the class format will incorporate debate and require students to actively
research and defend positions on existing policies. Class size will be set at a level to maximize
interaction and involvement.
628. Education Finance Policy. (C) Staff.
This course examines the legal, political and economic issues surrounding how public schools are
funded, including equity, productivity and the interaction of finance and school reform. Through
readings, discussion and written assignments, students will develop and apply policy analysis skills to
the area of education finance.
692. Education Policy Issues. (B) Maynard.
This course is an introduction to the process of conducting educational research. Its purpose is to help
students learn to approach problems like researchers by examining and critiquing existing research
and developing coherent "researchable" questions. Students will carry out a substantial independent
project where they will develop elements of a research proposal.
708. Schools as Organizations. (A) Ingersoll.
Schools are places of learning - but they are also workplaces, teachers are employees and teaching is
a job. This in-depth doctoral-level course focuses on theory and research concerned with the
organizational and occupational side to schools and teaching. It draws from multiple fields and
perspectives, including: organizational theory; the sociology of organizations, occupations and work;
educational administration; and school leadership. The objective is to have students udnerstand and
evaluate a series of different perspectives from theory, research and policy concerned with the
character of the teaching occupation and the organization of schools.
SM 712. (AFRC712, URBS460, URBS713) School Reform and Public Policy. (C) Hershberg.
This course examines how K-12 education policy is designed and implemented in the United States. It
uses a systems analysis as the framework for looking at who makes what kinds of demands on the
education policy system, how these demands are placed on the policy agenda, the decision making
process, and resulting education policies and policy outcomes. The course pays particular attention to
the roles of federal, state and local governments in education policy, and the impact of our
intergovernmental system on the design and implementation of policy. Students will also examine
major education policies and debate key education policy issues that arise at each level of
government.
720. Teachers and Teaching Policy. (C) Desimone.
Explores research, policies, and practices that promote a high-quality teacher workforce, and effective
instruction. Topics include recruitment, retention, mentoring, induction, professional development,
certification, value-added, merit pay, etc. Appropriate for students from different programs, including
education, social/public policy, psychology, political science, sociology, business, and current and
future teachers and school leaders.

Page 10 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
751. Introduction to Applied Quantitative Methods for Education Research: Pre-K to 20. (M)
Staff.
An introduction to the interpretation and use of data about higher education through the use of
computer-assisted methods of statistical analysis. Emphasis is on the implications for educational
policy and research design.
838. Applied Research & Reporting. (A) Maynard.Prerequisite(s): Competence in basic statistics
and computer literacy.
Hands-on experience conducting applied research. Students will be guided through a research project
of relevance to education or social policy chosen by the student, with assistance from the instructor.
The research entails analysis of one or more public or quasi-public use data sets, such as the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth; the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth Child Supplement; The
Teenage Parent Demonstration Data Base; the National Profile of Child Care Settings Data Base; or
the National Post Secondary Student Aid Survey. The students will prepare journal-length papers
based on their research and respond to the reviews of classmates and the instructor.
SM 900. Research Seminar in Applied Research Synthesis Methods. (A) Maynard.
Issues in research design, development of a literature review, and dissertation proposal.

EDLX-Educational Linguistics
507. (EDUC465) Sociology of Language. (M) Pomerantz.
This course examines the intersection of language and society, asking how language ideologies might
be implicated in the construction and maintenance of such constructs as national identity, 'standard'
language variety, race, and ethnicity. Through theoretical readings and case studies, participants will
question how particular linguistic situations give rise to certain institutional practices and probe how
these practices might foster inequitable relations of power.
528. TESOL Practice Teaching. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): EDUC 527 & EDUC 537. Permission
needed from the department
Fieldwork course for TESOL students. This course focuses on reflective teaching practice, providing a
space for students to combine theory and practice as they apply the theoretical constructs of TESOL
coursework to their own language teaching. Students will become accurate and systematic observers
of and thinkers about their own teaching methodology, in order to continue to develop into increasingly
effective language teachers. The theme of a student-centered language classroom will be explored
through scholarly literature, pedagogical techniques, and students' own classroom teaching. To
participate in this course, a student must be teaching a language class for the majority of the
semester.
516. Teaching Second Language Writing. (A) Pomerantz.
This course introduces participants to a range of theoretical and practical issues related to second
language literacy development, with a particular emphasis on writing instruction. An intensive servicelearning project offers course participants the opportunity to work with developing writers in a bilingual
community organization. The dual emphasis on theory and pedagogy is intended to create space for
critical reflection on the characteristics, production, teaching, and assessment of written texts in bi/
multilingual educational settings.

Page 11 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
517. Classroom Discourse and Interaction. (B) Rymes.
In this course students will read research that investigates the role of classroom interaction in learning
and human development. Students will also learn how to "do" discourse analysis using real classroom
data. Students will practice and critique methods for analyzing classroom discourse data as teachers,
with an aim of developing a critical awareness of our own language use and role in society.
527. Approaches to Teaching English and Other Modern Languages. (C) Flores/Wagner,S/Hondo.
This course provides students with an introduction to theory and practice in second and foreign
language teaching. Students will (a) develop an understanding of the history of language teaching
practice and how such a perspective informs current day approaches, (b) explore the relationship
between the context in which the language is learned and taught and classroom practice, and (c)
develop an awareness of teaching principles central to a personal pedagogical approach and teaching
philosophy. Students should have a field site where they can observe, participate, and collecct
classroom data.
537. Educational Linguistics. (A) Butler/Moore/Hondo/Paninos.
For students with little or no linguistics background. An introduction to the basic levels of language
(phonetics and phonology, morphology and semantics, syntax, pragmatics) with special emphasis on
the relevance of linguistic concepts to education. Other topics may include bi/multilingualism, language
variation, and language acquisition.
539. Teaching Performance Art for Cross-Cultural Education. (A) Staff.
This class examines issues related to cultural communities and the arts, specifically performance,
writing and storytelling as an educational tool for generating cross cultural and intercultural
understanding, dialogue and exchange. Assignments will focus on, cross-cultural research and
dialogue, and skill building in teaching, writing and performance. Students will also develop an
understanding of how performance can be used to enhance classroom activities in elementary/middle/
secondary/post secondary classroom curricula.
546. Sociolinguistics in Education. (C) Hornberger/Flores/Moore.
The educational consequences of linguistic and cultural diversity. A broad overview of sociolinguistics,
introducing both early foundational work and current issues in the field. Topics include language
contact and language prestige, multilingualism and language ecology, regional and stylistic variation,
verbal repertoire and communicative competence, language and social identity, codeswitching and
diglossia, language socialization and language ideology, as they relate to educational policy and
practice in the United States and around the world.
SM 563. TESOL Seminar. (C) Wagner,S/Paninos.Prerequisite(s): EDUC 528. Permission needed from
the department
A weekly seminar that seeks to consolidate, broaden, and deepen knowledge of the main themes,
trends, issues, and practices in the field of TESOL. Students will demonstrate their ability to observe,
analyze, and reflect upon their teaching as they make connections between theory and practice, all
critical skills for ongoing professional development which relate to the students' final project, a
reflective-analytical or action research paper. The project is based on a thirty-hour teaching internship
completed during the semester in which the students are enrolled in EDUC 563. The project is
individually designed and subject to the instructor's approval. All students in the M.S.Ed./TESOL and
Language & Literacy must submit a proposal for the internship in the semester before they take the
Seminar.

Page 12 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
566. Cross Cultural Awareness. (B) Staff.
This course provides students experiential and cognitive awareness through affective exercises and
readings. It explores issues of living in a diverse society through a variety of educational strategies
including workshops, small group process, guest lectures, etc. It represents the seminar portion of
P.A.C.E. (Programs for Awareness in Cultural Education): An "Educating the Peer Educator" Program.
SM 577. Selected Topics in Educational Linguistics. (C) Staff.
The focus for each semester will vary to reflect those issues most relevant to current concerns in
educational linguistics.
SM 567. Internship: ICC. (C) Moore/Pomerantz.Prerequisite(s): Eight or more courses toward M.S.Ed.
degree in Intercultural Communication. Permission needed from department.
All students in the MS/ICC program must complete a supervised internship of at least 160 hours prior
to enrolling in this course. The supervised internship is individually designed and is subject to
approval; students must submit a Prospectus describing the internship in the Fall or Spring semester
prior to beginning the internship. This course offers guidance as students complete the portfolio or
reflective paper, which is based on the experience and data collected during the internship. Through
this course, students in the M.S.Ed./ICC program will discuss ways to conceptualize the internship
experience, situate it meaningfully within the field of intercultural communication, locate and analyze
relevant research literature, and prepare the portfolio or reflective paper, with an overall goal of
developing the ability to communicate clearly and effectively for an academic and/or professional
audience.
571. History of the English Language. (M) Staff.
A survey of the major historical trends in the development of the English language.
572. (GSWS572) Language and Gender. (B) Pomerantz.
This course traces the development of research on language and gender, introducing key theoretical
issues and methodological concerns in this area. Participants will consider how gender ideologies
shape and are shaped by language use, with particular attention to how research findings can be
applied to educational and other professional settings.
579. Intercultural Communication and Miscommunication. (L) Staff.
An introduction to basic issues in intercultural communication, reviewing various perspectives on the
nature of culture, communication, "miscommunication" and inter-cultural relations. The course
criticizes two commonly held assumptions: 1) that "cultures" are unitary and unchanging and 2) that
inter-cultural contact and communication is inherently more troublesome then intra-cultural
communication. The course considers ways in which intercultural communication has important
consequences in education, medicine, social services, business settings, and international contact
situations.
583. Content-Based Instruction. (M) Staff.
This course offers students opportunities to investigate, observe, design practice, and critically
evaluate the integration of content and language teaching - Content Based Instruction. The settings
investigated include thematic English Language teaching; co-teaching and peer coaching by ESL and
content teacher teams; and sheltered content instruction, among others. Standards, integrations of
tasks, and special language requirements in various content areas are reviewed.

Page 13 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
634. Language Assessment. (B) Butler.
This course concerns a basic theoretical and practical foundation in language assessment, with
particular emphasis on assessments used in second and foreign language education. The course
covers various kinds of testing (both formal testing and performance-based assessment), theoretical
and technical issues associated with test development, administration, the social influences of testing,
and future directions in language assessment.
637. Advanced Methods in TESOL. (M) Staff.
Students employ action research techniques and case studies to investigate challenges in teaching
second languages in a variety of classroom settings. Fieldwork in teaching ESL forms the basis for a
course paper. Based on student self-evaluation, class members also review and deepen knowledge of
such L2 teaching issues as form focus within task-based and content-based instruction, learning
strategies in second language teaching, and materials adaptation. Readings on research and theory in
second language pedagogy lead to a critical consideration of the construct of "methodology" within the
diverse sociocultural contexts in which they plan to teach.
641. Language and the Professions. (L) Wagner,S..
This course takes a micro-analytical perspective on interaction and language use in various
institutional domains. Topics include doctor-patient interaction in diagnosis and treatment; trial
examination and jury deliberations, as well as informal modes of conflict resolution; and news and
political communications. Attention is focused on the interrelationships between interactional practices,
institutional tasks and social identities. Students will be given opportunities to mutually engage in
hands-on data analysis during the class.
650. Communication and Culture in Context. (B) Pomerantz/Paninos.
This course brings together scholarship in pragmatics, interactional sociolinguistics, and critical
discourse analysis to help language teachers and intercultural educators foster pedagogies that
respond to the complexities of living in a multilingual/multicultural society. Through a series of
readings, small research projects, and activities, participants will develop a collection of educational
practices that focus on 1) raising metalinguistic awareness, 2) developing resources and strategies for
communicating across perceived social and cultural boundaries, and 3) assessing intercultural
interactional competence.
675. Structure of English. (C) Staff.
The goal of this course is to increase students' explicit knowledge of selected isolatable parts of the
English language and to identify their pedagogical applications with respect to the needs of learners of
English as a foreign/second language. This goal is realized through an investigation of: 1)frequently
occurring linguistic forms and the rules and principles that govern the way that these forms can be
combined and ordered; 2) the meanings that can attach to these forms; and 3) the social functions
associated with these forms.
661. (LALS661) Language Diversity and Education. (A) Hornberger. Permission needed from the
department
Exploration of issues affecting educational policy and classroom practice in multilingual, multicultural
settings, with an emphasis on ethnographic research. Selected U.S. and international cases illustrate
concerns relating to learners' bilingual/bicultural/biliterate development in formal educational settings.
Topics include policy contexts, program structures, teaching and learning in the multilingual classroom,
discourses and identities in multilingual education policy and practice, and the role of teachers,
researchers, and communities in implementing change in schools.

Page 14 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
670. Second Language Development. (C) Butler/Larsen-Freeman/Hondo.
This course provides an introduction to theory and research on second language acquisition.
Linguistic, cognitive, social and pedagogical perspectives are considered through readings, lectures,
activities, and assignments. Students gain an understanding of research design, methodology, and
documentation through guided analysis of published studies and an opportunity to deign and
implement research projects.
674. Curriculum and Materials Development for English Language Teaching. (A)
Hondo.Prerequisite(s): EDUC 527 & EDUC 537 or permission from instructor.
This course is designed for those who are ready to develop skills in curriculum, course and materials
design. The objectives of the course include learning how (a) to become able to analytically respond to
readings on curriculum, course and materials development; (b) to analyze the sociocultural, economic,
linguistic and occupational contexts of language teaching programs; (c) to design an original
semester-long ESL/EFL course; (d) to design original pedagogical tasks and supplementary materials;
and (e) to design in a group. EDUC 527 & EDUC 537 provide essential background for this advanced
course.
676. Discursive Approaches in Intercultural Communication. (A) Rymes/Moore.
This course offers a discourse-based approach and hands-on introduction to the field of intercultural
communication, from the micro-level of interpersonal interaction to the macro-level of institutional
practice. Through a series of readings and service learning projects in multicultural settings, students
will hone their observational and analytic abilities, while gaining an appreciation of and facility for
participating in the communicative diversity around them. Topics will include a repertoire approach to
examining language in use, interpretation and metacommentary, and the possibility of intervention to
facilitate new communicative patterns.
679. Language for Specific Purposes. (C) Pomerantz/Paninos.
This course offers international students a hands-on introduction to the practices that constitute
academic language use in the fields of TESOL/ICC through a variety of scholarly readings that also
serve as an introduction to multilingual writing research. Participants will focus on developing skills and
strategies that will strengthen their existing expertise in the following areas: locating, reading, and
critiquing academic articles; producing graduate-level written work across a variety of genres; and
participating in oral activities.
SM 845. Seminar in Microethnography. (M) Staff.
This course provides an introduction to theory and method in the unified analysis of verbal and
nonverbal behavior as it is culturally patterned, socially organized, and socially organizing in face-toface interaction, in an approach that integrates participant observation with the detailed analysis of
audiovisual records. Students read relevant literature in linguistic anthropology, interactional
sociolinguistics, conversation analysis, and embodiment in social interaction. Class requirements
include in-class reading presentations, a small microethnographic research project, and several short
data analysis reports drawing on differing levels of analysis and differing theortical orientations.
Students review and apply methods of audiovisual data collection, transcription, processing, archiving,
and presentation.

Page 15 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
911. Issues in Second Language Acquisition. (M) Butler.Prerequisite(s): EDUC 670. Permission
needed from instructor
This course is designed for students to be able to analyze, synthesize and discuss second language
acquisition theory and research on the basis of intensive reading of work that reflects perennial and
current issues in the field. Comparisons and connections are drawn from theoretical and empirical
literature on second language acquisition processes, constraints, and interventions.
Relevant research methods are also addressed. Topics, issues, and readings are updated each time
the course is offered.
SM 927. Research Seminar: Language Policy and Education. (M) Hornberger. Permission needed
from instructor
Seminar participants are introduced to concepts, theories, and methods in the field of language
planning and policy, which they then apply in developing their own library-based research on specific
language planning cases from around the world. Cases may include: official language decisions,
instructional medium choices, literacy initiatives, gender-neutral language reforms, foreign/heritage/
second language pedagogy and policy, indigenous language revitalization efforts, or other languagerelated decisions and policies at international, national or local levels.

APHD-Applied Psychology & Human Development
553. Foundations of Education for Diverse Learners. (M) Flores/Hondo.
An introduction to Special Education including the history, the legal regulation of Special Education,
and an examination of critical issues.
SM 502. Citizen Sociolinguistics. (B) Rymes.
In this course we will draw on the Internet and daily news (internet circulated, usually) to find "Citizen
Sociolinguists" who speak with authority, while juxtaposing these media with the usual scholarly
sources.
522. (AFRC522) Psychology of the African-American: Implications for Counseling and Human
Development. (B) Stevenson.
Using an Afro-centric philosophical understanding of the world, this course will focus on psychological
issues related to African Americans, including the history of African American psychology, its
application across the life span, and contemporary community issues.

Page 16 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
SM 534. School-Community Counseling & Mental Health Partnerships. (M) Watts.
This course is designed to give students a theoretical framework for developing school-community
partnerships for the delivery of mental health prevention and intervention services to children. The
course will include examination of several practice programs developed from the theoretical framework
to provide services to parents, children, and school staff, including pairs therapy for the development
of relationship skills and understandings; a whole-class prevention program to build social-emotional
and academic skills in elementary children; and a preventive intervention to build capacity in Head
Start to engage parents facing adversities such as degression. The practice-oriented elements of the
course will also address the partnership process itself. We will consider tools and strategies for
conducting needs assessments and gaining entry into schools as an outside community member, and
developing documentation and evaluation measures to gather clinical information as well as to assess
program effectiveness. At all times, the course will hold the multiple perspectives of the individual child
and the systems around the child, with the goal of having students understand individual interventions
in the context of institutional relationships and systemic change.
This course will focus primarily upon work in schools grades pre-k through 8, but will consider
issues and strategies relevant to high schools as well.
557. Developmental Theories & Applications with Adolescents. (C) Nakkula.
Focuses on theories of adolescent development and the nature of transactions among adolescents,
peers, teachers, specialists, and significant others. Also covers methods of intervening to promote
psychological growth.
558. Developmental Theories & Applications with Young Adults. (M) Staff.
This course is designed as a collaborative inquiry toward constructing and elaborating upon theories
of young adult development and interactions with young adults as counselors, teachers, family
members, and higher education administrators. Using a seminar or working group format, participants
explore the relationships among developmental theory, sociocultural contexts of young adults, practice
(e.g., interventions, relationships), and research. Using literature from empirical and popular,
mainstream sources, participants will engage in learning of how young adults navigate the transition
from adolescence to adulthood. Specific topics to be addressed include, "the quarterlife crisis,"
financial needs of young adults, relationships, family, and career exploration and crystallization.
560. Human Development. (C) Fegley.
Provides an introduction to physical, social, cognitive, emotional and linguistic development from
infancy to adulthood. Major theories related to human development will be discussed along with
methods of intervention for individuals in various life stages.
561. Adolescent Development. (A) Fegley.
An interdisciplinary view will be used to frame biological, psychological, and social development
among adolescents. Special emphasis will be placed on how contextual factors influence
developmental outcomes. Theories of adolescent development and methods of intervention will also
be discussed.
562. Personality & Social Development. (A) Chen.
The effects of social processes on human development in the interlocking contexts of parents, family,
peers, school, communities and culture are considered during the major developmental periods of
infancy, childhood, adolescence and adulthood. The course examines what is unique about social
developments, how social relationships can be defined, and what are the social precursors and
consequences of specific developmental changes.

Page 17 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
565. Contemporary Issues in Community Psychology. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): EDUC 686.
This course focuses on three related issues. The history and evolution of community psychology within
the political, economic and scientific contexts is the first issue. Second, students examine the
discipline's distinction between community mental health and community psychology. Third, students
examine the implications of disease prevention and health promotion for the discipline's current status
and future development.
568. Cognitive Development. (A) Frye.Prerequisite(s): EDUC 560 or equivalent.
This course examines the cognitive development of the child from infancy to adolescence with an
emphasis on cultural context. Topics include: origins of thinking, Piaget, Vygotsky, intelligence,
development of learning and memory, language development, and moral development.
574. (AFRC574) Race/Ethnicity in Human Development. (M) Staff.
This interdisciplinary course will employ a critical perspective on minority youth development, analyze
the existing literature, and propose alternative explanations for observed phenomena. It will consider
pertinent issues and theories of middle childhood, adolescent and young adult development.
585. Advanced Group and Family Counseling. (L) Lappin.
This course focuses on the basics of systems intervention with a specific focus on families and groups.
The purpose is to develop more advanced knowledge of practical therapeutic problem-solving skills at
the graduate student level using ecological, systemic, and cultural perspectives. Students will be
exposed to advanced group therapy strategies with children, youth, and adults, with family
interventions across various mental health diagnostic populations, and how to intervene within groups
and families in which cultural differences and styles are key themes.
Students will also be challenged to develop a preliminary rationale for a systemic theory of behavior
change. Given the diversity of clients that counselors see professionally, some advanced and
demonstrated knowledge of how cultural differences will be addressed in the counseling session and
in the relationships of larger societal institutions will be expected. This course will satisfy the Group
work II requirement of the MPE program in Professional Counseling and Psychology. The course also
fits within the APHD theme of Applied Psychology: Intervention and Certification.
SM 575. (AFRC575) Selected Topics in the Psychology of Education. (M) Nakkula.
This course is designed to present quantitative and qualitative approaches to studying and evaluating
developmental interventions for children and youth. Basic assumptions underlying the two overarching
methodological orientations will be presented throughout the course as a means of determining which
sets of,methods to use for different types of research and evaluation questions. In addition to
presenting quantitative and qualitative methods separately, the course also will present integrative or
mixed-methods approaches.

Page 18 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
580. Developmental Theories & Applications with Children. (B) Fantuzzo.
The purpose of this course is to provide students with an opportunity to consider mandates, models,
and methods related to enhancing the learning and development of preschool and early elementary
school children. This course emphasizes the application of developmental psychology and multicultural
perspectives to the design of effective classroom-based strategies. Students will consider a "wholechild" approach to understanding children's classroom behavior in context. Major assignments will
involve gathering and synthesizing information about children in routine classroom situations. This
information will be used to better understand children's needs and strengths and how they are
manifested in transaction with classroom contexts. Students will focus on one or more students to
conduct a comprehensive child study of the child in context.
This contact must include opportunities to observe children in a natural setting and interact with
them on a regular basis throughtout the semester. The placement needs to be approved by the
professor. If students do not have a regular classroom contact, one will be arranged.
581. (GSWS581) Advanced Psychology of Women: Counseling Issues for Women. (L)
Stanley.Prerequisite(s): Introduction to Psychology and an undergraduate course in the Psychology of
Women or approval by professor.
The course is intended for those who already have a foundation in the study of the psychology of
women and want to expand their understanding of the provision of psychological services to include a
contextual, feminist, and relational perspective. Theoretical and applied practices regarding women's
mental health, issues of diversity, sexuality and relationships for women will be addressed
603. Wellness and Addictions Counseling. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Students must be enrolled in
the M.Phil.Ed. in Professional Counseling Program.
This course will provide an overview of addictions and addiction counseling from research, theory, and
applied perspectives. It will also explore contemporary conceptions of "wellness" and wellnesspromotion strategies, particularly for people struggling with addictions. Applied skills for addressing
wellness and addiction will be framed within current evidence-based research.
610. Cultural Perspectives on Human Development. (A) Chen.
This course focuses on children's and adolescents' development from cultural and cross-cultural
perspectives. Topics include traditional and recent theories of cultural influence on development,
research strategies, socialization values and practices, and socioemotional and cognitive functions
such as aggression and conflict, shyness, and academic acheivement in cultural context. Issues
involving ethnicity and social and cultural changes are also discussed.
612. (GSWS612) Interactional Processes with LGBT Individuals. (M) Wortman.Prerequisite(s):
EDUC 663 Socio-Cultural Foundations/Applied Psychology.
In the past quarter century, the awareness of the unique issues facing lesbian, gay, bisexual and
transgender (LGBT) individuals has expanded and become essential knowledge in our work as
educators, providers of psychological services, and other service provision fields. This course provides
a contextual and applied understanding the interactional processes facing LGBT individuals.

Page 19 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
613. Group Counseling. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): EDUC 686 Psychological Interventions.
Through didactic and experimental learning activities, students will explore various theoretical
approaches to groups, learn and apply principles of group dynamics, develop familiarity with ethical,
legal and professional standards relative to group leadership, learn member roles and functions in
group, examine group counseling in a multicultural context, and relate these issues to the leader's
interpersonal style and behavior. Applications to specific developmental stages and contexts will be
explored.
615. Parenting and Children's Educational Development. (M) Staff.
Theory and research on family influences on achievement development, models of the home-learning
environment; parental involvement in schools.
663. Sociocultural Foundations in Counseling. (B) Warren.
The course provides an understanding of sociocultural concepts essential to the work of counselors
and providers of psychological services. This course provides a contextual and applied understanding
of working with socioculturally diverse clients. The purpose of this course is to expand one's
understanding of the impact of sociocultural and contextual factors, social-psychological influences,
the role of values, and the interaction of identities in counseling and psychological services. Both
intervention and prevention strategies will be addressed. The student will be required to demonstrate a
working knowledge of key concepts in sociocultural psychology and the topical areas addressed in the
course.
617. Counseling for School to Career Transitions. (B) Nakkula.
This psychology course will focus on the developmental and emotional changes that coincide with
adolescents' conceptions of work and work-related activities. As a course in career psychology,
students will be exposed to readings from multiple disciplinary perspectives and will be expected to
learn how to work with youth as they struggle through decisions on career and moving beyond the
safety of childhood and adolescence. In addition, students will learn about the family-youth and schoolstudent relational dynamics and that occur simultaneous to the adolescent's development of a work
ethic.
623. Childhood Interventions. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): EDUC 560 Human Development.
The course addresses the following key questions: what is early childhood intervention? What was it,
and what has it become? What are its historical roots in child development research, early childhood
education, special education, and maternal and child health? However, while addressing earlier
conceptual issues, this survey course also links these conceptualizations to contemporary
developments in the field that are of special significance to educators.
658. Diagnosis and Psychopatholgy. (M) Richardson.
In this course, students will explore the etiology, course, and prevalence of pscyhological disorders of
childhood and adolescence. Particular focus is on the role of these issues in the developing person
within the context of family, school, and culture. Major clinical and empirical classification systems
(DSMIV and the new DSM5) are examined, as well as some of the diagnostic and assessment
strategies used to aid the conceptualization and treatment of these disorders.

Page 20 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
677. Information and Communications Technologies for Education and Development in Global
Perspective. (B) Wagner.
The importance of the relationshp between education, technology, and social-economic development
is increasing in the U.S. and around the world. What are new information and communications
technologies (ICTs), how are they being deployed, and for what reasons? Are new ICTs a means for
delivering skill-based or distance education information, and in what ways are they becoming a part of
societies today? What constitute, then, ICTs for Development (ICT4D), and what role do they play in
societies that are 'industrialized' and 'developing'.
685. Career Counseling and Development. (L) Spierling.Prerequisite(s): Permission needed from
instructor.
Career development is studied as an aspect of general development theories of educational and
vocational choice and adjustment; psychological aspects of occupations.
686. Counseling Interventions. (A) Ortiz.Prerequisite(s): Admission to Counseling and Mental Health
Services.
This course will provide an overview of the approaches to various psychological interventions with a
focus on theory, key concepts, and therapeutic processes.The purpose of this course is to develop a
knowledge base of the underlying principles and approaches of psychological interventions. Students
will be required to demonstrate a working knowledge of the key concepts of the psychotherapeutic
approaches presented, distinguish between different approaches, and make a preliminary rationale for
the use of a particular approach. Students also are expected to develop a critical perspective and
demonstrate the ability to analyze theories and interventions.
687. Counseling Ethics & Professional Principles. (A) Salter.
This course will provide the student with an opportunity to learn and incorporate the multifaceted roles
of the professional counselor and assist the student in developing a sense of their professional identity.
In this process, the course will focus on the professional role of the counselor; ethics and their
application across situations and professional settings; and gaining strong professional communication
abilities. The primary goals of the course are to develop the student's awareness of their roles and
responsibilities as a professional, incorporating ethical standards as a counselor, increasing
professional communication skills, and understanding the roles of counselor across professional
settings.
688. Counseling Practicum. (E) Garinger/Ortiz.Prerequisite(s): EDUC 687 AND admission to
Masters program in Counseling and Mental Health Services. May be repeated for credit.
Seminar and lab to accompany supervised practicum or apprenticeship experiencesin schools,
colleges, or community agencies. Placement to be arranged by instructor.
697. Post-Master's Internship in School Counseling. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Successful
completion of the master's program in Psychological Services.
Seminar to accompany post-master's internship. Meets requirements for certification in school
counseling and special education. Instructor must approve placement.

Page 21 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
709. Peer Relationships in Childhood and Adolescence.. (B) Chen.
This course focuses on various aspects of children's peer relationships, especially with regard to their
significance for human development. The roles of family, community, and socio-cultural contexts in the
development of interpersonal competence and relationships are discussed. The course explores
possible intervention strategies to help children with peer relationship difficulties.
747. Biological Psychology. (M) Staff.
The biological bases of behavior, including genetics, physiology, endocrinology and bioethology.
717. Professional Internship in Counseling I. (A) Watts.Prerequisite(s): Formal admission into
Professional Counseling and Psychology M.Phil.Program. Must be taken concurrently with
Professional Counseling and Psychology Lab.
The course will consist of experiential and small group learning, with a focus on practicing and refining
skills related to advanced work in psychological services, including the application of various
techniques of counseling, ethical considerations, and critiques of live and simulated counseling
sessions through role-playing, audio and visual taping.
718. Professional Internship in Counseling II. (B) Watts.Prerequisite(s): Formal admission into
Professional Counseling M.Phil.Program.
Lab seminar group with a seminar group leader leader is the second component of the Professional
Counseling Internship course. Lab will provide students with exposure to others' experiences in
different types of internships, working with a variety of different client populations.
A primary goal of this course is to help each student refine his/her evolving knowledge of self as a
provider of psychological services to others. Students will also evaluate contexts of practice and the
professional skills, ethics and practices inherent in effective provision of counseling and psychological
services. This course consists of two components: CLASS MEETINGS, during which the full group will
meet to address issues related to work in various internships, as well as discuss the development of
advanced counseling skills and issues; and, LAB SEMINAR GROUP, which consists of 7-8 masters
students with a seminar group lab leader.
725. Advanced Ethics & Professional Development in Counseling. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): EDUC
687, formal admission into Professional Counseling M.Phil.Program.
The purpose of this course is to expand the student's awareness of the multifaceted responsibilities
and roles of school counselors in primary and secondary school settings. Through readings, class
discussions and guest lectures, it is intended that students will acquire additional competencies and a
broader appreciation for professional issues confronted by school counselors and varied
responsibilities they have in helping students focus on academic, personal, social and career
development in an effort to achieve success in school and lead fulfilling lives. An important emphasis
of this course will be on school counseling from an ecological and multicultural perspective.
764. Cognitive Processes. (A) Frye.Prerequisite(s): EDUC 568 or equivalent.
Basic concepts, theory, and research in cognitive science, problem-solving, psycholinguistics, memory,
perception and social cognition. Special topics may include reading, bilingualism, computer modeling,
and cognitive theory applied to education and non-education settings.

Page 22 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
765. Developmental Deviations. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): EDUC 560 or equivalent.
Theoretical orientations toward handicapping conditions in children; controversial issues in description
and categorization; the relationship of disabilities to developmental (cognitive, social, emotional)
processes.
766. Advanced Professional Counseling Interventions. (A) Morris.Prerequisite(s): EDUC 686
Psychological Interventions.
This course will focus on advanced issues in the clinical practice of professional psychology with
children, adolescents and adults where students will practice clinical skills in role-played therapeutic
situations. Students will be using this class as preparation for the formal clinical examination required
by all Master of Philosophy in Education students prior to graduation from the Professional Psychology
and Counseling program.
782. Assessment for Counselors I. (A) Cohen.Prerequisite(s): Admission to Counseling and Mental
Health Services or Professional Counseling M.Phil.Program.
A critical analysis of tests and clinical methods in assessment as related to theories of intelligence,
and includes: 1) factors influencing assessments; 2) assessment theory; 3) assessment practices; 4)
interpretations of assessments.
783. Assessment for Counselors II. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Admission to Counseling and Mental
Health Services or Professional Counseling M.Phil.Program.
Review and administration of assessment instruments in the areas of adaptive behavior, perceptual
abilities, neurological functioning, diagnostic and achievement measures, vocational interests, and
objective personality measures. Integration and interpretation of results and intervention.
784. Psychological Consultation. (M) Stevenson.Prerequisite(s): Admission to Counseling & Mental
Health Services or Professional Counseling M. Phil. Program.
Study of theories of consultation and their applications at the professional level. Methods and
procedures in applied behavior analysis are introduced as skills for successful consultation.
785. Selected Topics in Professional Psychology. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Admission to
Counseling & Mental Health Services or Professional Counseling M. Phil. Program.
Consideration of research and theory, on selected advanced topics.
SM 860. Proseminar in Interdisciplinary Studies in Human Development (ISHD). (A) Stevenson.
Corequisite(s): May be repeated for credit.
Review of literature on representative developmental topics. The course also incorporates guest
lecturers to present research and theorizing covering different aspects of human learning and
development. The experience represents an important opportunity for ongoing professinal
development. May be repeated for credit. Nonetheless, doctoral students are expected to attend the
presentations throughout their doctoral training career even if not enrolled in the course for credit.
960. Advanced Research in Human Learning and Development. (M) Frye.
Selected topics from human learning, human development, cognitive processes, social psychology,
and personality.
661. PLN 3B: EXTENDED.

Page 23 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
SM 980. Research Seminar in Counseling. (M) Staff.
This course is designed to position students to acquire a more sophisticated understanding of
research methods in order to conduct and critically evaluate empirical research in applied and clinical
settings.

EDCE-Continuing Education
PLN-Penn Literacy Program
675. PLN 14B: Child of poverty: Using PLN Frameworks to Positively Impact Student
Engagement. Gephart, K.Prerequisite(s): PLN 14.
This course provides educators with an opportunity to look closely at a research-based professional
text: Engaging Students With Poverty in Mind by Eric Jensen. The content of the text describes factors
that are crucial to student engagement strongly connected to socioeconomic status. Engagement
strategies educators can use are explored that empower learners and are essential for student
achievement and success.
The course focus includes: creating a positive and high-energy classroom environment focused on
student engagement, building students' cognitive capacity including a deeper understanding of content
and increasing student motivation and effort. Participants learn and utilize a variety of strategies that
can be modeled in the classroom with their students when reading and writing, as they participate in
group reading discussions. Co-construction of learning and a focus on The Four Lenses of Learning
and The Five Reading Writing Talking Processes provide the foundation for course discussions.
676. PLN1 For Early Childhood Directors. Botel-Sheppard, B / Saia, A.
During this course early childhood center directors learn about best literacy practices for emergent
readers and writers as they support teachers with practical and enduring frameworks and strategies
(The Five Emergent Reading Writing Talking Processes and The Four Lenses of Learning) that can be
adapted to their specific setting and their teachers' and students' needs. Directors are introduced to
strategies that provide their teachers with ongoing instructional problem solving throughout the course.
This course integrates instructional leadership strategies that provide common language and
classroom approaches that create positive and successful early literacy experiences as they increase
student engagement, fostering positive emergent reading, writing and talking experiences in the
classroom. Directors gain a deep understanding of developmentally appropriate practice based on
engaged and reflective teaching and learning. Directors are asked to bring a children's book used in
their center to each class.
Directors try out their favorite strategies in their center between sessions so that they can reflect on
the impact of this type of practical implementationin their classrooms. Directors are also introduced to
professional readings that are discussed in class. They write up their try-outs in the form of ongoing
reflective journals and a final project (action plan) to share with colleagues.

HED-Higher Education
504. Contemporary Issues in Higher Education. (B) Staff.
An introduction to the central issues and management problems in contemporary American higher
education.

Page 24 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
SM 505. Globalization & the University. (B) Ruby.
The aim of this course is to help students understand the basic concept of globalization, how it
impacts higher education in general, and how it shapes the global market for human capital and
fosters private sector and for profit provision and diversifies modes of delivery of higher education. The
seminars cover the nature of globalization and the way it affects the movement of people between
economies to gain and apply skills and knowledge, the creation of branch campuses, the growth of
transnational education and the importance of brands and information in the global higher education
market.
SM 510. Democratizing Higher Education Participation: Six National Cases and the Global
Allure of MOOCs. (B) Ruby,A.
The aim of this course is to examine how public policy has shaped and been shaped by higher
education in different political and economic settings. Seminars will examine themes such as access
and equity in higher education participation, the role of higher education in economic development and
nation building, and how higher education can promote democracy and an enlightened citizenry.
512. University-Community Partnerships. (B) Grossman.
Ranging from civic engagement to economic development, institutions of higher education in the
United States have long been involved in a variety of relationships with their local communities; in
recent years, there has been increasing attention paid to the opportunities and challenges implicit in
those relationships. In this course, students will study and discuss the history, rationales, and
manifestations of the partnerships that have developed. Through readings, faculty-and student-led
discussions, guest lecturers, and policy-oriented projects, students will develop better understandings
of the many topics surrounding university-community partnership activities. Among other themes we
will consider institutional roles and relationships, service learning, community perspectives, policy
issues, and evaluation.
541. Access & Choice in American Higher Education. (M) Perna.
College enrollment is a complex process that is shaped by the economic, social and policy context,
higher education institutions, K-12 schools, families, and students. The course will examine the
theoretical perspectives that are used to understand college access and choice processes. The
implications of various policies and practices for college access and choice will also be explored, with
particular attention to the effects of these policies for underrepresented groups. As an Academically
Based Community Service (ABCS) course, this course is also designed to generate tangible
recommendations that program administrators and institutional leaders may be used to improve
college access and choice.
556. Higher Education Finance. (B) Finney.
Designed for non-financial managers, this course provides students with an introduction to basic
concepts related to the finance of higher education. It examines the forces that influence the financing
of higher education at both the state and federal levels. It addresses both the macro-economic and
micro-economic issues related to higher education finance. In addition, students will be introduced to
issues related to institutional finance.

Page 25 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
542. Management in Higher Education. (B) Staff.
This course is an introduction to management issues and practices in higher education. It is designed
to provide students with working understanding of both the role of administration within the culture of
higher education and the contemporary issues related to management of fiscal, personnel, facilities,
and information resources. The interface between administrative and academic decision-making will
be explored within these contexts and case studies will be used to highlight the concepts.
SM 543. (AFRC545) UNDERSTANDING MINORITY SERVING INSTITUTIONS. (A) Gasman.
Students taking this course will learn about the historical context of HBCUs in educating African
Americans, and how their role has changed since the mid- 1800's. Specific contemporary challenges
and successes related to HBCUs will be covered and relate to control, and enrollment, accreditation,
funding, degree completionk, and outreach/retention programming. Students will become familiar with
MBCUs in their own right, as well as in comparison to other postsecondary institutions.
569. Administration of Student Life. (A) Staff.
This course covers a variety of issues in the management of student services on campus. After
examining the historical context of student affairs and the theoretical frameworks of student
development, students explore ways to most effectively administer the numerous activities that
comprise student affairs programs.
SM 573. Higher Education Policy : What Can We Learn from Other Countries?. (A) Ruby/Eynon.
This course examines the proposition that policy makers, educational leaders and practitioners can
learn from what has worked and failed in higher education policy and practice in other nations.
592. Professional Development in Higher Education. (B) Aikins.
To prepare for a career in higher education, students are engaged in a 20-hour a week assistantship in
the field. This course complements and enhances the graduate assistantship. Emphasizing practical
application of theory and skill development, the course does the following: provides students with tools
to embark on a successful job search; offers networking opportunities with administrators in higher
education; and introduces students to relevant and timely literature and resources in higher education
professional development.
593. Experiential Learning Design for Intercultural Communication. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s):
EDUC676 or permission from the instructor.
Provides new and experienced educators the opportunity to learn and practice training design and
facilitation using the principles of experiential and adult learning.
594. Diversity in Higher Education. (B) Harper,S/Tiao.
This course explores issues of diversity as they pertain to higher education, including race, ethnicity,
gender, class, religion, sexual orientation, ideology, etc. Rather than focusing on specific populations
of people, the course will tackle issues of diversity within the context of concrete higher education
functions and problems.

Page 26 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
SM 604. Ethics and Leadership in Higher Education. (A) Armacost.
This course looks critically at the various theories of leadership with a special emphasis on the ethical
dimensions of leadership. Initial classes are devoted to common ethical frameworks from Plato and
moving through Kant, Hume and into the present practical application of ethics to leadership.
Leadership theory and practice reveal that there is no one approach that is best or that works in all
situations. Aspiring leaders must have a variety of lenses through which they can analyze and
understand the elements involved in ethical leadership. At the end of the course students will be able
to apply essential concepts of ethical decision making and leadership - the role of trust and the ability
to build trust, the uses of power, the importance of good decision-making, the conflicting priorities that
arise from living out your core values in the workplace.
606. Development in Higher Education. (B) Gasman.
This course is designed for current aspiring professions in the area of fundraising and institutional
advancement. Topics will include: a history and overview of philanthropy, motivations for giving, ethics,
fundraising courses, leadership, annual giving, public relations, and volunteer management. Special
emphasis will be placed on fundraising in communities of color.
607. Faculty and Academic Governance. (A) Hartley/Garland.
Introduction to selected issues pertaining to faculty and academic governance, such as: Who governs
American colleges and universities? What are the respective roles of the president, the board of
trustees, the faculty, and students in institutional decision making? The course will also explore key
contemporary governance issues.
SM 620. Enrollment Management. (B) Kaplan.
Enrollment management is an organizational concept of strategies for achieving institutional goals. The
course provides an overview of multiple enrollment management models, the evolution and maturation
of these models, the related implications of these organizational structures and strategies, and the
benefits and drawbacks on institutions and their markets. This course is designed primarily for
masters-level students.
608. Organizational Change in Higher Education. (M) Hartley.
Colleges and universities today face tremendous challenges--calls by external constituents for greater
accountability, scarcity of resources, greater competition, and pedagogical innovations. The need for
change, and for change agents, in our institutions of higher learning has never been greater. This
course examines organizational change both theoretically and practically in college and university
settings. Students will be introduced to many of the most current, influential, and promising theories
about how change occurs at the departmental, institutional and system level. Using case studies, we
will apply these frameworks in order to diagnose and develop constructive strategies for meaningful
change.
SM 624. Gender in College. (A) Harper.
Examined in this course are theories and interdisciplinary perspectives pertaining to gender on college
and university campuses. Emphasis is placed on the social construction of gender, gendered
institutional norms and practices, gender disparities on college campuses, and the unique experiential
realities of women, men, and transgender persons in a variety of roles and postsecondary educational
contexts.

Page 27 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
631. Research Topics. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Permission needed from department.
This seminar offers students a collaborative setting in which to explore a topical area, craft a literature
review and refine their research questions. The course will be of special interest to doctoral candidates
who are draqwn to an area of inquiry (e.g., presidential leadership, diversity, access, organizational
change) but now wish to elicit from it a discrete "researchable" question.
640. History of American Higher Education. (A) Gasman.
This interactive course focuses on the history of American higher education from the Colonial period
through the current day. An emphasis is placed on underrepresented institutions and individuals.
Students will have the opportunity to make connections between historical trends and movements and
current issues.
642. Higher Education in American Society. (A) Perna.
Our nation's colleges and universities are affected by social, economic, and political forces. Societal
forces impose a variety of demand on higher education institutions, as reflected by calls for greater
accountability, improved access, cost containment, and incorporation of new technologies. This course
considers the ways that colleges and universities are challenged to respond to demands for increased
accountability while maintaining their commitment to such core values as academic freedom and
institutional autonomy.
656. College and University Teaching. (C) Staff.
In this class, students will learn how to systematically plan for a university course, develop a teaching
philosophy, create a course syllabus relevant to their discipline and expertise, design and implement
evaluation instruments to assess teaching and learning, experiment with a range of technologies to
advance teaching, and participate in a teaching simulation. This course also incorporates issues of
diversity with regard to teaching.
SM 693. Student Development in College Environments. (A) Staff.
An overview of college student development theory is offered in this course. Specifically, three families
of theory are explored: 1) Psychosocial and identity, 2) cognitive-structural, and 3) environmental. The
theories are discussed in terms of their foundations, constructs, and applicability to work in various
functional areas of higher education.
694. Organization and Administration of Intercollegiate Athletics. Harper,S.
Athletics play a critical role at colleges and universities. This course examines the role of
intercollegiate athletics, how they are structured, what educational purposes they serve and how such
programs influence the social and academic development of students.
704. Economics of Higher Education. (M) Presley.
Covers selected topics in the economics of higher education, including investment and consumption
theories, cost functions, university investment practices and principles, and academic labor markets.

Page 28 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
705. Proseminar in Research & Analysis. (A) Perna/Hartley.Prerequisite(s): Permission needed from
department.
This course is designed to provide students with the skills, information, and resources that are
necessary to develop a research proposal. This course will also examine strategies for completing
proposals and dissertations. A variety of research designs and approaches to educational research
will be explored. Through this course, students will become both informed consumers of research and
effective designers of research.
714. Law and Higher Education. (B) Roth.
An examination of the most important state and federal laws governing U.S. colleges and universities,
with an emphasis on current legal problems.
715. Case Studies in Higher Education Administration. (M) Harper,S.
This course is designed to enhance understanding of decision making in higher education
administration. Based on case studies, students will analyze, propose policies, generate action plans
and implementation procedures, and assess the potential consequences of their administrative
decisions.
513. Development of the Young Child. (D) Goodman.
This course will blend an explanatory and descriptive account of behavioral evolution over the yearly
years of life. After a review of "grand" developmental theory and the major themes of child change
(from images to representation; from dependence to independence; from instinctual to social beings),
this course will survey the child's passage from infancy through the early school years. While the
emphasis will be on the nature of the child--what she/he sees, feels, thinks, fantasizes, wants and
loves--these realities will be understood in terms of developmental theory. At each stage, the course
will review the development of cognition, personal identity, socialization, and morality in pluralistic
contexts.
716. Public Policy Issues in Higher Education. (M) Finney.
A study of the most influential federal and state policies, legislation and practices affecting colleges
and universities.

TLL-Teaching, Learning & Leadership
SM 501. (URBS501) Community Partnerships in Visual Arts & Education. Epstein.
This course will connect students with artists from the 40th Street Artist-in-Residence (AIR) program,
which provides free studio space and in exchange asks residents to share their talents with the local
community. This course is designated as an Academic-based Service Learning (ABCS) class,
meaning that students will be evaluated partly on their work in the community outreach situation.
508. Managing People. (C) Dwyer/Staff.
Professionals in organizations spend much, and often all of their time, attempting to influence others-subordinates, peers, superiors, clients, boards, owners, regulators, pressure groups, media and
others. This course presents an approach to human influence, based on the relationships among
values, perceptions, and behaviors.

Page 29 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
515. Field Seminar (Elementary & Secondary Education). Staff.
This seminar is designed to integrate student teaching fieldwork and university course work through
reading, discussion, and reflection. Central to this course will be teacher research, an inquiry stance
toward learning how to teach, and a social justice approach to education. Throughout the semester,
we will be examining a range of issues through theoretical and practice-oriented lenses that will
deepen our understanding of teaching and learning. Offered within the Teacher Education Program.
520. Literacy in Elementary/Middle Schools. Staff.
In this course, the interconnections of language, literacy and culture are explored in order to build a
knowledge base and understanding of how children learn to read and write. Emphasis will be on how
to teach and develop literacy curriculum in the elementary grades, and on how close listening and
observation of children in their classroom contexts, combined with a critical reading of research and
theory, can inform teaching practices. A central tenet of this course is that the best teachers of reading
and writing are themselves active and engaged readers and writers. An important goal is to combine
an inquiry approach to teaching and learning with an inquiry approach to thinking about how we teach.
Offered within the Teacher Education Program.
521. Science in Elementary/Middle Schools. (M) Bergey.
The goal of this course is to prepare teachers to facilitate science learning in the elementary and
middle school. Special emphasis is placed on striving for a balance between curricular goals;
individual needs and interests; and the nature of science. Offered within the Teacher Education
Program.
523. Social Studies in the Elementary and Middle Schools. Staff.
This course will focus on teaching and learning in the content area of social studies. Curricular and
pedagogical theories and practices will be examined for their educational significance, meaningful
integration of content areas, respect for students' cultures (past and present), and contribution to
social justice issues. Offered within the Teacher Education Program
529. Organizational Learning and Education. (B) Supovitz.
This course is an exploration of the theory, research, and practice of how individuals learn within
organizational contexts and how organizations themselves may learn, as well as the social, cultural,
and organizational forces that influence this process.
SM 530. Community Based Mathematics. (L) Remillard & Staff.Prerequisite(s): Admission to
Secondary Education Math or Science.
This course engages future teachers in identifying and leveraging mathematics learning oportunities
that exist within communities. First, participants apply mathematics to authentic community-based
problems. After exploring literature about the use of real-world contexts in mathematics instruction,
participants apply what they learn to design curriculum. Offered within the Teacher Education Program.

Page 30 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
531. Mathematics in the Elementary and Middle Schools. Remillard.
Learning to teach mathematics in ways that foster mathematical understanding and enjoyment for
every student requires that teachers draw on different kinds of knowledge, skills, and dispositions. In
addition to developing an understanding of central mathematical ideas, learning to teach math involves
learning about learners, the understandings and conceptions they hold, and the processes through
which they learn. It also involves developing skill in constructing tasks that engage students in
mathematical exploration, creating an environment that facilitates reasoning, and finding ways to
analyze and learn from one's own teaching. Offered within the Teacher Education Program.
550. Educational and Social Entrepreneurship. Staff.
This course provides an understanding of the nature of entrepreneurship related to public/private/for
profit and non-profit educational and social organizations. The course focuses on issues of
management, strategies and financing of early stage entrepreneurial ventures, and on
entrepreneurship in established educational organizations.
532. School Law. (L) Staff.
This course examines federal and state court cases, statues and regulations which affect students,
teachers, administrators and other community members involved with schools. There is a special
emphasis on developing conflict resolution techniques, including negotiation and mediation, so that
legally based disputes are resolved by building relationships rather than adversarial methods, such as
litigation.
L/R 536. The Teaching & Learning of Chemistry. (E) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Undergrad major or minor
in Science.
This course will examine issues associated with curriculum planning and enactment. In addition, the
teachers will learn how to undertake action research in their own classrooms so that they can learn
from their professional practices. The key topics to be addressed in this introductory course will
include: national, state and local standards; curricular resources; models for learning chemistry; social
constructivism and communities of practice; safety, equipment and storage; equity and culturally
relevant pedagogy; building canonical ideas from laboratories and demonstrations; understanding
chemistry at macroscopic, microscopic and symbolic levels; social interaction; analogues, models and
concepts maps; uses of interactive technologies to promote understanding of chemistry; connecting
chemistry to science and technology; alternative assessment of learning; involving the home and
community in the learning of chemistry; international perspectives on the teaching and learning of
chemistry in urban areas.
SM 540. Teaching Diverse Learners. (D) Watts, Bialka, Kinney Grossman.Prerequisite(s): Permission
needed from department.
This course engages student teachers working with diverse learners, presenting factual information
about specific areas of need situated within a socio-cultural framework. It addresses content related to
both special education and English language learners in four areas: (1) Introduction to Special
Education; (2) Learning Categories; (3) Issues in Special Education; and (4) Working with English
Language Learners. Offered within the Teacher Education Program
SM 551. Outside the School Box: History, Policy and Alternatives. (A) Johanek.
This course explores historical and contemporary challenges involved in the policy and practice of
non-school education agencies and factors that work in service to local school/community settings.
Students will explore several historical case studies, conceptual frames, and current policy challenges,
culminating in a community-based research project.

Page 31 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
552. Video Games and Virtual Worlds as Sites for Learning. Kafai.
Drawing on work from the education, psychology, communication, and the growing field of games
studies, we will examine the history of video games, research on game play and players, review how
researchers from different disciplines have conceptualized and investigated learning in playing and
designing games, and what we know about possible outcomes. We will also address issues of gender,
race and violence that have been prominent in discussions about the impact of games.
554. Teaching & Learning in Urban Contexts. Staff.
This course marks the beginnings of your year-long inquiry as preservice teachers, and hopefully your
career-long inquiry as committed educational professionals, into the challenges of and opportunities
for teaching and learning in urban settings. The theories and practices explored in this course are
offered as foundations for instructional approaches that are intentional, reflective, inquiry-based,and
learner-centered. As we investigate multiple dimensions of teaching and learning (curriculum design,
learning theories, instructional techniques, etc.), you will have opportunities to both clarify and
challenge the assumptions, beliefs, hopes, fears, and goals that you bring to your preapration to teach
in urban secondary schools. Offered within the Teacher Education Program.
555. Advanced Field Seminar (Elementary & Secondary Education). Staff.
This course focuses on praxis--the mutually supporting roles of theory and practice that bring rigor and
relevance to the work of educational professionals. This course is designed to give student teachers
opportunities to develop pedagogical orientations, to learn from "problems of practice" at placement
sites, and to enrich student teachers' theoretical and practical knowledge. All of these experiences will
inform the master's portfolio and will prepare teachers to continue to see themselves and their practice
as continuing sites for research. Offered within the Teacher Education Program.
590. (GSWS590) Gender & Education. (B) Staff.
This course is designed to provide an overview of the major discussions and debates in the area of
gender and education. While the intersections of gender, race, class, ethnicity, and sexuality are
emphasized throughout this course, the focus of the research we will read is on gender and education
in English-speaking countries. We will examine theoretical frameworks of gender and use these to
read popular literature, examine teaching practices and teachers with respect to gender, using case
studies to investigate the topics.
618. Leadership in Educational Institutions. (B) Lytle, J..
In this course class members will simultaneously engage in an academic study of educational
leadership focusing on Pre-K-12 schools and school districts, and in a continuing leadership
development laboratory experience designed to increase one's personal efficacy as leader. A basic
assumption for the course is that leadership is a central component of schooling; teaching is
considered as foremost a leadership activity, whether with five year olds or high school seniors, and
successful schools and districts are assumed to have capable leaders. The course will give particular
attention to the recent shift in role expectations for school leaders - from competent manager to
accountable instructional leader - and what this shift means in relation to the day-to-day work of
educational leaders.

Page 32 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
SM 605. Sustainability in Schools. (B) Ball.Prerequisite(s): Admission to School Leadership
Program.
This course looks at the issue of sustainability across three dimensions: financial,environmental and
programmatic. 1. The issue of financial sustainability focuses on the need of schools to carefully
manage funding sources and expenditures and raise supplemental dollars to underwrite aspects of the
mission of the school. Included in this focus will be the topics of marketing, communications, and
development. 2. Environmental sustainability is increasingly emphasized by schools as an educational
goal and an operating principal. This topic will include incorporating sustainability practices into school
wide decision making to build campuses which are increasingly green and less wasteful. 3. The third
and final focus of the course, programmatic sustainability, brings together many of the themes of the
entire leadership program as it reviews the ways schools must think about new models of educating
children including the implications of such issues as emerging research on learning, environmental
sustainability, globalization, and equity and access. The course utilizes the conceptual framework for
sustainability developed by the National Association of Independent Schools. Offered within the School
Leadership Program.
609. Counseling for Educators. (B) Staff.
The purpose of this course is to help professional educators develop an understanding of the major
issues involved in trying to help others. To accomplish this, it examines various counseling theories
and explores their relevance for working with students and parents as they confront normal issues of
learning and development. Through observation, skill building, and practice in natural settings,
students will have the opportunity to develop their own grounded theory of helping.
616. Master's Foundations of Teaching and Learning. (A) Kafai/Yoon/Staff.Prerequisite(s):
Permission needed from department.
The course explores theoretical and empirical perspectives on the questions: What is knowledge and
knowing? What is learning? What is teaching? How do contexts influence teaching, knowing, and
learning? A central goal of the course is to encourage students to consider these questions and their
interconnections for themselves, to examine ways scholars and practitioners have answered them, and
to develop an analytical framework to use in examining contemporary practices in settings that include
formal and informal, urban and international.
619. (URBS619) Critical Perspectives in Contemporary Urban Education. Staff.
The focus of this course is the conditions for teaching and learning in urban public schools, current
theories of pedagogy in urban education, and perspectives on urban reform efforts.
SM 621. Proseminar in Professional Education. (C) Staff.
An integrative seminar that will provide an opportunity to reflect, orally and in writing, on the issues of
quality, stability, and change in teaching, curriculum and school organization, toward the aim of
fundamental reform in educational practice.

Page 33 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
627. Teaching in the Middle and Secondary Schools. Staff.
Content-specific sections of this course (math, social studies, science) will examine approaches in
planning, implementing and evaluating methods for teaching science, mathematics and social studies
in middle and secondary schools. This course is grounded in the belief that teaching and learning
require educators to question our teaching purposes and practices through a process of sel-reflection,
collegial and student-teacher interactions as well as personal and professional growth. Using a variety
of learning theories and perspectives as the foundation for interactive teaching strategies, the stories,
questions and contradictions of each content area are examined from a variety of perspectives.
Offered within the Teacher Education Program.
630. Curriculum Theory & Foundations. Staff.
Helps students understand the ways that theory can inform and guide practice. It explores how
curriculum theories can lead to the development of richer, more effective curricular models. Placing
emerging, as well as extant theories within their social/political contexts, this course enables educators
to apply multiple lenses for examining, choosing and constructing theories and frameworks suitable to
their fields.
SM 632. Leadership in Independent, Public and Parochial Schools. Ball, E.Prerequisite(s):
Admission to School Leadership Program.
The challenges of leadership in both independent and parochial schools are important to consider as
part of the broader discussion of educational leadership in elementary and secondary education. The
course will identify themes that have implications for both private and public schools and will seek to
establish interconnections. This course will examine the history and social foundations of independent
and parochial education, and will consider issues of leadership that involve working with the various
constituencies within schools including board members, faculty, parents, alumni and students. This
course will conclude with a consideration of the relationship of independent and parochial schools to
public purpose and the overall goals of education within the contemporary society. Offered within the
School Leadership Program.
644. Technology-Mediated Teaching & Learning. (B) Staff.
Students in this course will critically evaluate the role of technology in education. Through a range of
inquiry projects, research analysis and hands-on experience, students will examine the potential risks
and benefits, as well as strategies of use for technology-mediated teaching and learning. Technologies
considered will include: skill-building software, microworld software, visualization and modeling tools,
internet search tools, media production tools, and collaboration technologies.
L/R 636. Advanced Topics in the Teaching & Learning of Chemistry. (E) Staff.Prerequisite(s):
Major or minor in Science.
The course will feature research undertaken in the classes of participants. The initial course was
designed to examine what was happening and to build understandings about why the teaching and
learning of chemistry occurred as it did within the participants' schools, clusters and school districts.
This course is intended to develop a cadre of teacher leaders in chemistry. The curriculum will address
the particular needs of the students and the standards of the school district. The goal is to implement a
curriculum that will lead to substantial improvement in the achievement of high school students. The
students will identify from the literature the best practices that are likely to be salient in the conditions
in which they teach and adopt these in an effort to attain rigorous standards. They will explore their
roles within the school and district as agents of systemic reform and will endeavor to build a local
community to sustain high quality teaching and learning.

Page 34 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
639. Design of Learning Environments. Yoon/Staff.
This course examines different theoretical frames and strategies related to the study and design of
learning environments in school, community and online contexts. Physical, social and cognitive
aspects of learning situations are considered as students evaluate current research and applications
in a variety of existing educational learning environments.
643. Instructional Leadership to Promote Learning. (A) Brody, Dawson, Mata and Ball.Prerequisite
(s): Admission to School Leadership Program.
This first course of the School Leadership Program for Aspiring Principals and the Independent School
Leadership Program begins with an exploration of values and beliefs underlying leadership in schools.
Students examine the knowledge, dispositions and performances needed for the continuous
improvement of K-12 instruction indicated in the Pennsylvania Standards for School Leaders, ISLLC,
as well as those identified in Balanced Leadership (2003), and other research. Participants study
current research in learning, teaching and assessment by focusing on student achievement in K-12
literacy and social studies. Students explore how effective school leaders connect theory to practice
and provide leadership for school reform in these two curricular areas. Coursework includes interactive
case studies, team projects, panel presentations and guest speakers. Offered within the School
Leadership Program.
SM 648. Practitioner Research. Ball, Dawson and Mata.Prerequisite(s): Admission to School
Leadership Program.
Developing school leaders who are skilled practitioner researchers is an important goal of the School
Leadership Program. The steps of problem identification, determining vital questions, identifying data
to be collected, developing a plan for collecting, analyzing the data, and developing a plan for
implementation, and evaluation based on the findings form the focus of this course. There are two
aspects of this course. The first is an introduction to practitioner research through a lecture series
conducted by Sharon Ravitch. The second is the development and carrying out of a practitioner
research project. The project will be completed to be submitted during the summer session.
Supervision and evaluation of that project will be conducted by Warren Mata, Priscilla Dawson,and
Earl Ball. Offered within the School Leadership Program.
SM 649. Applying Teaming and Moral Decision Making Concepts in Schools. Ball and
Mata.Prerequisite(s): Admission to School Leadership Program.
This course leads students to utilize two conceptual models to examine organizational practice in
schools: working in groups and applying moral/ethical decision-making in schools. These two unifying
concepts are studied in modules led by GSE faculty. In addition, ethical decision-making in schools will
be expanded by two sessions led by independent school leaders. Students are provided opportunities
to make connections between these two areas, which impact school leadership, as they engage in
whole-day Focused Observations in five schools in a variety of K-12 settings. To provide reflection on
these topics, a monthly discussion intergrating ideas into practice is held. Offered within the School
Leadership Program.

Page 35 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
651. Field Internship Seminar: Inquiring into Principal Leadership for School Improvement. (A)
Ball, Brody, Dawson, and Mata.Prerequisite(s): Admission to School Leadership Program.
This second course of the School Leadership Program supports each student in becoming a reflective
practitioner. Students develop the inquiry, communication, and interpersonal skills needed to build a
purposeful, collaborative learning community for adults and students. Through inquiry projects
students explore how effective school leaders can use data to inform their decisions. Focused
observations provide opportunities to visit area schools committed to school reform. Students engage
in a 360 hour on-site internship across the year with a current principal/school leader observing,
participating, collaborating and leading school based activities during the school year. A universityassigned mentor supervises the work of each student. Offered within the School Leadership Program.
654. Aligning Fiscal, Human and Community Resources in Support of the School's
Instructional Mission. (L) Brody, Dawson and Mata.Prerequisite(s): Admission to School Leadership
Program.
This course focuses on the effective utilization of resources to serve the mission of improving student
achievement. Connecting the daily decision-making of the school, including managing budgets and
funding streams, utilization of space, use of time, and scheduling and assignments of staff and
students in accordance with the school's mission are emphasized. Students purse an understanding of
how a school leader has a public role as an advocate, catalyst, and broker, in spanning the boundaries
between schools and the communities they serve. Students develop inquiry projects to further their
knowledge of community resources, budgeting, legal principles, school law and school district policies.
The Cumulative Portfolio is presented at the end of this course. Offered within the School Leadership
Program.
652. Developing Instructional Leadership in Practice. (B) Ball, Brody, Dawson, and
Mata.Prerequisite(s): Admission to School Leadership Program.
This course emphasizes how to connect organizational systems with the school's instructional
mission. Students investigate how distributive leadership is a key factor in consistent implementation of
the instructional mission. The significance of building a community of learners for both adults and
children is explored. Participants study the importance of aligning, managing, and evaluating
curriculum, instruction, assessment, professional development and instructional support systems with
a focus on K-12 student achievement in mathematics and science. Inquiry into effective uses of
technology, begun in the fall term, is intensified in this term. Coursework includes interactive case
studies, debates, inquiry projects and field investigations. Offered within the School Leadership
Program.
653. Field Internship Seminar: Inquiring into Organizational and Legal Dimensions to Principal
Leadership. (B) Ball, Brody, Dawson, and Mata.Prerequisite(s): Admission to School Leadership
Program.
The course emphasizes that effective schools commit to the ongoing learning of children and adults.
Systems thinking provides the lens through which students inquire into how the principal's
organizational leadership can support continuous school improvement through attention to school
climate, program coherence, and effectiveness of instruction. Students deepen their understanding of
law and policy, affecting three significant areas: special education, teacher evaluation, and students'
rights. Three focused observations provide opportunities to visit schools engaged in continuous school
improvement in mathematics, science and the arts. A University-assigned mentor supervises the work
of each student, as the 360 hour on-site internship continues. Offered within the School Leadership
Program.

Page 36 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
655. Fieldwork & Mentoring. (C) Ravitch.
This course is for practitioners and researchers engaging in and thinking about mentoring,
supervision, and fieldwork in teacher education and counseling as well as in social work and other
applied development fields.
657. Advanced Methods in Middle & Secondary Education. Staff.
Formal teaching and learning are on-going processes that require an examination of our practice and
purpose through self-reflection, self-evaluation, collegial and student/teacher interaction, and personal
and professional growth. This course is the second half of a content-specific secondary methods
sequence that is geared toward teaching middle and high school English, math, science and social
studies in an urban setting. Special focus will be on content, pedagogical strategies as well as specific
skills and Pennsylvania and national standards. We will work together as teacher-researchers to
combine theory with practice to increase our understanding and utilization of an inquiry based,
multiple perspective, constructivist approach to teaching. Offered within the Teacher Education
Program.
SM 659. Critical Issues in Education. Brody.Prerequisite(s): Admission to School Leadership
Program.
This course is designed to engage students in analysis of three important issues of relevance to
contemporary school leadership: technology, globalization and equity and access. As they explore
these topics students will be asked to define ways in which their leadership will provide guidance to
their schools. The instruction will be supplemented by current practitioners who will share how their
schools address these issues in practice. Offered by the School Leadership Program.
665. Research on Teaching. (A) Remillard.
This course is designed to explore the research literature on classroom teaching processes as well as
the contrasting conceptual and methodological approaches upon which this literature is based. The
course introduces students to the major substantive areas in the field, develops a critical perspective
on contrasting paradigms, and raises questions about the implication of research on teaching for
curriculum, instruction, evaluation, and teacher education.
668. Master's Paper Seminar. (B) Aplenc.
This seminar explores key foundational questions for graduate-level work: How is academic knowledge
formed and reproduced? How do we engage with and interrogate the scholarly research? And, how do
we participate in the academic conversation around a topic? The Master's Paper Seminar introduces
students to academic discourse, disciplinary writing conventions, and research practices. As part of
this course, students are guided through preparing a literature review of a topic of their choice. This
review, in turn, forms the foundation of their 30-40 page Master's Paper that is required for the
completion of the M.S.Ed degree.
696. In/formal Learning Experience Internship. (E) Kafai.
The In/formal Learning Experiences Internship is a two-semester course that meets throughout the
academic year to cover theory, research, and practice of informal learning. The internship is
undertaken from October to March each academic year in one of our partnership institutions and
includes about 120 hours field work. The course is designed to provide background readings, a
discussion forum of central issues in informal learning, and a place to share and exchange internship
experiences. This course will be required for all LST MSEd and TLL MSEd students as part of the
required Internship Program.

Page 37 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
SM 678. Critical Issues in Religious Education in a Diverse Society. (A) Staff.
This course will explore the role of the teacher-leader as religious educator, in both public and private
educational settings in the U.S. Participants will be asked to examine beliefs and understandings of
religions and of the historical roles that religion and religious beliefs play and have played in the
diverse public square in U.S. Since this is also a course that has a significant clinical component, a
flexible cu amount is requested; students will earn between 1 and 3 cu's depending upon the amount
of fieldwork activities undertaken.
SM 689. Contemporary Issues in Mathematics Curriculum. (B) Remillard.
Educational leaders and policy makers in the U.S. have long used curriculum reform to drive change in
K-12 teaching and schooling practices. This course examines the assumptions underlying this
approach and examines the related research evidence.
SM 691. Contemporary Issues in Science and Technology Education Research. (B) Yoon, Susan.
This course focuses on topics that represent some of the most salient and contemporary issues in
science education research today. The syllabus moves through four sections that address: 1)
Curriculum and Content (What and Why); 2) Learning Processes (How); 3) Contexts (When and
Where); 4) Teaching and Teacher Education (Who).
698. Politics of School Reform. (A) Quinn.
We explore the political causes and consequences of school reform in the post-Brown era. Coverage
will be eclectic so as to give participants a broad, interdisciplinary background in the field. Rather than
the standard categories organizing this scholarship (e.g. by level, decision-making body, or issue area)
we'll structure our exploration by considering fundamental conclusions about the politics of reform.
702. Conceptual Models in Educational Administration. (C) Staff.
The goal for the course is to help each of us develop new ways of understanding the schools and
organizations in which we work. Using Gareth Morgan's/Images of Organizations/ as our primary text,
and a set of related readings, we will use metaphor as an interpretive tool. Morgan's premise, and the
premise of this course, is that one's ability to act in or on organizations is facilitated by one's capacity
to "read" them from different perspectives. Since most of us have spent most of our lives going to and
working in schools, the challenge of "seeing" schools from new perspectives is therefore held to be
particularly difficult.
719. Research on Teacher Education and Learning to Teach. (B) Rust.
This course focuses on issues of research, practice, and policy related to teacher education at the
preservice, induction, and continuing education levels in the United States and internationally. The
course is designed as a seminar to engage participants in the study of teacher education through
interaction with researchers and policy-makers, through in-depth study of critical issues in the field,
and through engagement with teacher education programs. It is anticipated that each course
participant will develop a literature review focusing on one or more topics related to critical issues in
teacher education.

Page 38 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
726. Doctoral Foundations of Teaching and Learning. (C) Kafai/Remillard/Yoon/Staff.
The course explores theoretical and empirical perspectives on the questions: What is knowledge and
knowing? What is learning? What is teaching? How do contexts influence teaching, knowing and
learning? A central goal of the course is to encourage students to consider these questions and their
interconnections for themselves, to examine ways scholars and practitioners have answered them, and
to develop an analytical framework to use in examining contemporary practices in settings that include
formal and informal, urban and international.

QMTD-Quantitative Methods
625. Data Processing and Analysis. (A) Turner.Prerequisite(s): Educ 667 or equivalent.
Use of Statistical Software including Statistical Analysis (SAS) to effectively build a wide variety of
datasets for use to address a range of empirical research questions. Evaluate conventional methods
for dealing with missing data and apply contemporary methods using SAS.
667. Introductory Statistics for Educational Research. (C) Boe.
Scales of measurement; indices of central tendency and variability; product-movement correlation;
introduction to the chi-squared; Z, T, and F distributions.
680. Evaluation of Policies, Programs and Projects. (A) Boruch.Prerequisite(s): EDUC 667 or
equivalent.
Basic evaluation policy and methods for determining nature and severity of problems, implementation
of programs relative effects and cost-effectiveness of interventions to reduce problems, design and
conduct of evaluation studies in education, social services, crime and delinquency, in the U.S. and
other countries.
768. Measurement Theory and Test Construction. (M) McDermott.Prerequisite(s): EDUC 684 or
equivalent.
Design of ability, achievement, and performance measures such as those applied for high-stakes
decision making in large-scale assessment and for diagnosis and classification of individuals;
advanced true-score and item response theory; item formatting, analysis, selection, calibration, linking,
and scaling; analysis of reliability for continuous, ordinal, nominal, and composite scales; analysis of
differential item functioning; unidimensionality, and local independence; model contrasting, test
equating, and scaling for longitudinal assessment; standards and cut-point setting.
683. (STAT502) Survey Methods & Design. (B) Boruch.Prerequisite(s): Educ 667 or equivalent.
Undergraduate statistics or tests and measurement.
This course covers the methods and design of field surveys in the U.S. and other countries in
education, the social sciences, criminal justice research, and other areas. It covers methods of eliciting
information through household, mail, telephone surveys, methods of assuring privacy, enhancing
cooperation rates and related matters. Finally, the fundamentals of statistical sampling and sample
design are handled. Much of the course is based on contemporary surveys sponsored by the National
Center for Education Statistics and other federal, state and local agencies.

Page 39 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
684. Measurement & Assessment. (A) McDermott.
Analysis of primary assessment concepts including basic theoretical principles, types and purposes of
assessment devices, levels of measurement, standardization and norming, and methods to support
reliability and validity; special focus on appropriate test interpretation, fairness, measurement of
change, and incremental validity; application of standards for test development, usage, and critique in
education, health care, public policy, and scientific inquiry.
767. Regression and Analysis of Variance. (C) Boruch.Prerequisite(s): EDUC 667 or equivalent.
This course covers design of controlled randomized experiments, analysis of survey data and
controlled field experiments, including statistical models, regression, hypothesis testing, relevant data
analysis and reporting.
771. Factor Analysis and Scale Development. (A) McDermott.Prerequisite(s): EDUC 684 or
equivalent.
Advanced measurement theory; exploratory and confirmatory item factoring and clustering for selfreport, observational, rating, performance, and personality instruments;factoring of dichotomous and
ordered categorical data, full-information factoring; scaling procedures, hierarchical structure, fullinformation bifactor structure, invariance, generality, reliability, validity, interpretation, and scientific
reporting.
777. Structural Equations Modeling. (A) Rovine/McDermott.Prerequisite(s): Introductory Statistics.
Theory and application of means modeling and longitudinal analysis through structural equations,
including observed variable regression with multiple equations simultaneously estimated, confirmatory
factor analysis measurement models using multiple observed indicators to define sets of latent
variables, and regression relationships among multiple latent variables; advanced applications for
repeated measures and multilevel growth modeling in educational and social science research.
829. Policy Research Seminar. (C) Boe.Prerequisite(s): EDUC 667 or equivalent.
Study of the roles of scientific inquiry in development and assessment of contemporary educational
and social policy. Analysis and application of foundational research, statistical and psychometric
methods to inform a variety of policy topics and related issues and problems encountered in policy
formation and evaluation.

Page 40 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
871. (CRIM871) Randomized Trials and Experiments. (A) Boruch.
This course will cover three alternatives to conventional modeling in the social sciences: (1) design
and execution of field trials in education and other social sectors including criminology, (2) quasiexperiments especially contemporary research comparing results of randomized and non-randomized
trials, and (3) analysis for descriptive and exploratory purposes. The course themes include causal
inference, vulnerability of models applied to observational data, recent developments computerintensive inductive approaches to data, and related matters.
Although some methodological background papers will be discussed, the seminar is case study
oriented with readings from contemporary research on the topics from peer reviewed journals and
well-vetted reports issued by governmental and nongovernment agencies. Cases will include work
supported by IES on effects of Odyssey Math, for example, and work in the crime and justice arena.
We will study the work of scholars affiliated with Penn who are actively involved in randomized and
non-randomized trials, for instance, and the work of colleagues at other universities (Berkeley,
Northwestern, Wisconsin, Princeton, others) and colleagues in non-profit and for profit research
organizations such as Analytica, AIR, Mathematica and others that contribute tolearning in this arena.
Colleagues who have contributed notably to contemporary trials and related topics, and whose work
we study, will be invited to present guest lectures. Seminar participants are required to read relevant
papers prior to the presentations.The coure is open to graduate students who have had basic statistics
courses at the graduate level, and have a strong interest in evidence based policy and in studies that
transcend discipline boundaries.
880. Complex, Multilevel, and Longitudinal Research Models. (A) McDermott. EDUC 767 or
equivalent
Design construction, sampling, internal and external validity principles; univariate and multivariate
statistical treatment of experimental and quasi-experimental data; computer processing, interpretation,
and reporting for simple and complex factorial,repeated measures, time series, growth trajectory,
unbalanced, and multiple consistent and inconsistent covariates designs; error covariance structure
modeling, hierarchical linear (and nonlinear) modeling, and multilevel individual growth-curve
modeling.
535. Literature for Children and Adolescents. (C) Thomas.
Theoretical and practical aspects of the study of literature for children and adolescents. Students
develop both wide familiarity with children's/adolescents' books and understanding of how literature
can be used in elementary/middle/secondary school curricula. Students complete course projects that
focus on literature in specific classroom, research, home, or professional contexts.
881. Applied Multivariate Statistics. (B) McDermott.Prerequisite(s): EDUC 767 or equivalent and
permission of instructor.
Multivariate strategies for hypothesis testing, prediction, and classification including multiple
regression, multivariate multiple regression, canonical regression, multiple logistic regression, multiple
discriminant functions, factor analysis of scaled variables, hierarchical cluster analysis, and
multivariate classification analysis; computer processing, interpretation, and reporting.

RWL-Reading, Writing & Literacy
525. Fieldwork in Language in Education. (C) Waff.
Supervised fieldwork for individuals preparing to work with reading specialist/teachers in school
settings.

Page 41 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
533. Forming and Reforming the Elementary Reading/Writing/Literacy Curriculum. (A)
Campano.
Students explore the theory and practice of constructivist approaches to teaching reading/writing/
talking across the curriculum. They read widely and discuss issues that are informed by theory and
research in many fields of inquiry including children's and adolescent literature, educational linguistics,
cognitive psychology, curriculum, and anthropology and assessment. They write and share integrative
journals; develop, teach and reflect upon holistic lessons; and complete an individual or group project
of their own choosing.
549. (FOLK552) Writing and Culture. (L) Camitta.
In this class we will look at writing as an expressive and instrumental part of culture and society. We
see writing as cultural artifact and cultural behavior, shaped by and shaping the context of its use. This
approach to writing is the foundation for the new literacy studies, which understands writing as several
variable, multiple, diverse and changing practices contingent upon specific cultural and social contexts.
Readings for the course are drawn primarily from the New Literacy Studies, but also from philosophy,
anthropology, folklore, literary theory, literature and linguistics. We will consider ways these
approaches to understanding and describing writing can inform classroom practice.
578. Teaching Reading and Study in Colleges and Universities. (L) Cohen, M.
This course is designed for both pre-service and experienced instructors and administrators who are
interested in teaching and/or researching the concept ofacademic literacies and the array of academic
skills in postsecondary settings,and/or directing programs in reading, writing and study strategies at
the postsecondary level. The course presents theoretical frameworks relevant to theteaching of study
strategies, theories of cognitive development, and practical instructional methods. Emphasis is placed
on the process and content of such instruction, materials and methods for teaching, and ways to
organize postsecondary literacy programs.
SM 582. Theories and Pedagogies of Teaching Writing. (A) Stornaiuolo.
This seminar examines various theories and pedagogies of teaching writing in multilingual, multimodal
contexts. It explores the historical and ideological underpinnings of contemporary theories of writing
and attends to how writing, and the teaching of writing, is shifting in a mobile, networked, and global
age.
SM 588. Digital Literacies in a Networked World. (B) Stornaiuolo, A.
This graduate seminar is designed to explore how literacy and learning are changing as people
participate with digital technologies across intersecting local and global networks. Participants will
collaboratively investigate how young people's digital literacies-their culturally and socially situated
meaning making practices mediated by digital tools-emerge in relation to constantly shifting
technologies of communication and are constructed, reconstructed, negotiated, and embodied in
multiple semiotic systems across everyday contexts. This course highlights how digital literacies are
situated, and how these socio-cultural understandings illuminate issues of power and privilege.
626. The Discourses of Teaching Reading. (B) Staff.
This course draws on varying pedagogical and personal perspectives to explore conceptions of
reading comprehension and how it can be taught to children and adolescents. Focus will be given to
how certain ways of structuring dialogue about a text profoundly change how readers think about and
do reading.

Page 42 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
629. Teaching English/Language and Literacy in Middle and Secondary Schools. (A) Stornaiuolo.
This course is a collaborative inquiry into the dynamic concept of adolescent literacy and its potential
as an organizing construct for improving teaching and learning. It provides opportunities to investigate
a variety of resources including our own histories as well as a range of print, digital and visual texts
and to conduct fieldwork in various middle and secondary school classrooms where youth are being
positioned (and positioning themselves) as literacy learners and literacy is being defined, performed,
practiced, interrogated, and interpreted, within and beyond the school curricula. By engaging with
youth, in various texts and contexts and for a range of purposes, participants will try to make sense of
how adolescents negotiate their worlds, in school and out. The approach to literacy is interdisciplinary,
drawing from the domains of literature, composition, linquistics, curriculum theory, anthropology and
psychology and from theory, research and practice of both university-based and school-based
teachers, writers and researchers. The intent is to pose and refine questions about what it means to
teach literacy in ways that take seriously what youth bring to school as their own knowledge and
passions, cultural and linguistic resources.
662. Picturebooks and the Practice of Literacy. (B) Thomas.
This course examines the formal properties of picturebooks and their use in enabling literacy
development. The course uses aesthetic theory, theories of text-picture relationships, theories of
literacy and theories of literary understanding, and also exposes students to empirical research on
children's responses to this literary form.
633. Selected Topics in Reading/Writing. (M) Staff.
Examines a topic of current interest to theory, research, and practice in writing.
635. Assessing Language and Learning Differences. (B) Gadsden/Campano.Prerequisite(s):
EDUC 533. Auditors not permitted
This course exposes students to a wide variety of assessments used to look closely at growth in
reading/writing/literacy. Students critique both formal and informal approaches to assessment as well
as complete structured observations of learners within diverse instructional contents. Emphases
include contextual and affective components of reading/language difficulties, innovative assessment
procedures, observational strategies and collaborative inquiry.
SM 645. Issues in Education and Health: Disparities and Prevention in Schools and
Communities. (B) Gadsden.
Drawing upon research and scholarship in health and education, this course aims to deepen our
knowledge, understanding, and ability to effect positive change in the health and health practices of
students and families in urban settings, using schools and community agencies as sites of
engagement.
666. Young Adult Literature, Media & Culture. (B) Thomas.
This course acquaints students with the ever-expanding body of literature written for young adults,
considering the theoretical and pedagogical issues it raises. Readings include many young adult
novels; empirical research on adolescent response to literature; and literary theory.

Page 43 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
669. Seminar in Practitioner Inquiry. (B) Campano and Hartley.
This course is designed as a collaborative investigation into practitioner inquiry and the work of inquiry
communities in K-16 and graduate/professional school settings, professional networks and
community-based organizations. The focus is on conceptual and methodological frameworks and
methods of practitioner inquiry and the contexts, purposes and practices of differently situated inquiry
communities. Participants will explore a range of practitioner inquiry traditions and texts that go by
terms such as action, collaborative, critical, community-based, participatory, autobiographical,
emancipatory, narrative and pedagogical. They will also conduct an inquiry based on their particular
interests and contexts. The course will emphasize practitioner inquiry that intentionally engages issues
of equity, access and culture in educational settings.
671. Adult Literacy. (A) Staff.
Teaching reading/writing/literacy to adults for whom English is a first or second language. Topics
include contrasting conceptions of literacy and learning; participatory literacy programs; instruction and
curriculum for adults with diverse cultural and linguistic backgrounds and nationalities; alternative/
performance-based assessment; and practitioner research in adult literacy education.
681. Literacy and Illustrated Texts: Picturebooks, Comics and Graphic Novels. (M) Thomas.
Students develop familiarity with illustrated materials - including picturebooks, comics, and graphic
novels - while cultivatng understanding of how illustrated texts like these can be used in 21st century
elementary/middle/secondary literacy curricula. Students complete individualized and group course
projects that focus on illustrated texts in specific classroom, research, critical, theoretical, home,
community, and/or professional contexts.
SM 713. Responding to Literature: An Interdisciplinary Perspective. (A) Thomas.
This course deals with the ways in which readers respond to and transact with literary texts, and aims
at helping students understand the nature of the variety of ways in which literature interfaces with our
lives. Three different types of discourse are read: literary criticism; empirical research on response to
literature; and literary texts themselves. Various types of literary criticism are considered, including (but
certainly not limited to ) what is commonly called "reader response criticism"; text-based criticism; and
criticism that contextualizes literature socially and historically. The empirical research on response
deals with ways in which readers of various ages interact with literature, mostly in school settings;
some attention is given to instructional design and critique of methodology. The literary texts range
from picturebooks to literature for young adults.
723. (AFRC723) Multicultural Issues in Education. (A) Gadsden.
This course examines critical issues, problems, and perspectives in multicultural education. Intended
to focus on access to literacy and educational opportunity, the course will engage class members in
discussions around a variety of topics in educational practice, research, and policy. Specifically, the
course will (1) review theoretical frameworks in multicultural education, (2) analyze the issues of race,
racism, and culture in historical and contemporary perspective, and (3) identify obstacles to
participation in the educational process by diverse cultural and ethnic groups. Students will be required
to complete field experiences and classroom activities that enable them to reflect on their own belief
systems, practices, and educational experiences.

Page 44 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
724. Literacy: Social and Historical Perspectives. (M) Staff.
A review of the cross-cultural and historical literature on writing and reading with emphasis on the
identification of norms and practices which affect the teaching and learning of reading and literacy
today. Special attention to the social functions of literacy in work, home, and school settings and to
myths regarding the consequences of literacy for cognition, socio-economic mobility, and predictability,
and the predictability of citizen behaviors.
SM 835. Seminar in Reading and Writing. (M) Staff.
Participants in the course examine landmark studies in the field of reading, writing, and literacy;
explore different approaches to composing critical reviews of the literature for academic journals,
dissertations and other research projects; and select, search, and review the theoretical and empirical
literature related to a topic of their own interest in the domains of reading, writing and literacy.
735. Tutorial Work in Reading/Writing/Literacy. (B) Gross.Prerequisite(s): Permission needed from
instructor.
Tutorial in Reading Writing and Literacy, is designed for participants to gain knowledge and insight into
the major challenges facing learners in their quest for proficiency in literacy. The course participants
investigate and develop instructional plans for the literacy needs of learners in pre-K to 12th grade
settings. Course participants will investigate the roles and responsibilities of the literacy specialist as
related to identifying the needsof learners and planning appropriate instruction to meet those needs.
737. Research in Teaching Writing. (M) Stornaiuolo, A.
This doctoral seminar explores theories and research on writing, investigating current and traditional
areas of inquiry in the field of writing studies. As class participants review and analyze theoretical and
empirical literature on writing and teaching writing, the seminar will offer students opportunities to
compose texts and reflect on their roles as writers in the academy through collaborative inquiry.
Participants will think together about the the purposes, functions, and consequences of writing in
diverse communities and across school and out-of-school settings. The course will pay particular
attention to how writing is shifting in a mobile, networked, global age, and how multimodality,
interactivity, and hybridity characterize our composing lives.
834. Theories of Reading. (M) Campano.
This course is designed as a collaborative inquiry toward constructing and elaborating theories of
practice as teachers and/or researchers of reading. Using a seminar or working group format,
participants explore the relationships among theory, reading, practice, pedagogy and research. The
course's conceptualization is informed primarily by (1) frameworks from critical, feminist and culturallycentered literatures which foreground issues of equity, representation, and ethics; and (2) current
conversations in the field of literacy where the definitions, purposes, and practices of reading have
been made problematic. It also invites participants to engage the notion that knowledge for teaching
and research comes from inquiry into the questions, issues, and contradictions that arise from
everyday life. The course provides historical lenses for comparative analyses of theoretical frameworks
and research paradigms as well as opportunities to investigate participants' individual histories as well
as teaching and research interests.
836. Issues in Instructional Leadership in Reading and Writing. (B) Waff.
Participants will consider current critical issues in Reading, Writing, and Literacy, such as: improving
accountability and assessment; approaches to professional development and curriculum development;
and the use of scientifically "valid" research to advance literacy learning.

Page 45 of 46

EDUCATION
(ED) {EDUC}
917. Research Seminar: Language and Power. (M) Street.
The course examines the relationship between language, meaning and power in their social context.
The course is organised around a number of core themes; Language studies rooted in Critical
Discourse analysis; The application of Bourdieu's concepts to this field; multi modality; the growing
concern with 'Superdiversity' that links Local/ Global; academic literacies, with particularreference to
the writing required in students' own contexts; and methodologicalissues in researching language and
power; and we then bring all of this to bear on our own context under the heading 'language in
education'.
SM 920. Research Seminar in Reading and Writing. (B) Campano.
For doctoral candidates and others engaged in research and advanced professional study in the field
of literacy.

Page 46 of 46

