ENGINEERING
(EG) {ENGR}

101. Introduction to Engneering. (A)
This course is intended to introduce students to the field of engineering. It will expose students to the
engineering disciplines through hands-on laboratory experiences. In addition, the course will provide
tutorials on how to use important software packages as well as a "Professional Preparation" module
through studies of communication (writing and speaking skills), ethics, leadership and teamwork. This
course is ideal for any freshman interested in exploring the possibility of studying engineering at
Penn. The course counts as as a engineering requirement in SEAS.
212. Concepts in Micro- and Nanotechnology. (C) Prerequisite(s): Math 104 and Physics 93/140
(or higher), or permission of the instructor.
Seminar/Lecture course on micro- and nanotechnology intended for nonspecialists. This course will
discuss how very small structures and devices, as well as systems comprising these devices, are
fabricated and characterized, with application examples from microelectronics,
microelectromechanical systems, and quantum devices and systems. Current societal and ethical
implications of micro- and nanotechnology, as well as creation and exploitation of commercial
opportunities, will be discussed.
503. Engineering in Oil, Gas and Coal, from Productin to End Use. (C)
While conventional wisdom is that the world is running out of fossil fuels, technical advances such as
deep water production, directional drilling, hydrofracturing, and the refining of non-conventional crude
oil sources has increased the resource base significantly and there are well over 100 years of
reserves of oil, natural gas and coal. The effect of technology advances has been most profound in
the United States, where net energy imports are projected to fall to 12% of consumption by 2020.
Excellent, highly technical careers are available in these industries, with opportunities to reduce their
impact on the environment and in particular on climate change. The course will cover engineering
technology in oil, natural gas and coal from production through end use. It will equip graduating
students with the knowledge to contribute in these industries and to participate in informed debate
about them
105. Introduction to Scientific Computing.
This course will provide an introduction to computation and data analysis using MATLAB - an industry
standard programming and visualization environment. The course will cover the fundamentals of
computing including: variables, functions, decisions, iteration, and recursion. These concepts will be
illustrated through examples and assignments which show how computing is applied to various
scienti?c and engineering problems. Examples will be drawn from the simulation of physical and
chemical systems, the analysis of experimental data, Monte Carlo numerical experiments, image
processing, and the creation of graphical user interfaces. This course does not assume any prior
programming experience but will make use of basic concepts from calculus and Newtonian physics.
250. Energy Systems, Resources and Technology. (C) Prerequisite(s): Basic understanding of
chemistry and physics.
The course will present a comprehensive overview of the global demand for energy, and the resource
availability and technology used in its current and future supply. Through a personal energy audit,
students will be made aware of the extensive role that energy plays in modern life, both directly,
through electricity and transportation fuel, and indirectly in the manufacturing of goods they use. The
course will cover how that energy is supplied, the anticipated global growth in energy demand, the
resource availability and the role of science and technology in meeting that demand in a world
concerned about climate change. The roles of conservation, improved efficiency and renewable
energy in meeting future demand in a sustainable, environmentally benign way will be covered.

Page 1 of 2

ENGINEERING
(EG) {ENGR}
504. Fundamental Concepts in Nanotechnology. (C)
This is a Master's level course that seeks to teach the physics needed to begin a study of
engineering and science at the nanometer scale. Since the nanometer scale is so close to the
quantum scale, much of the course deals with an introduction to quantum mechanics but the course
also includes discussions in solid-state physics, electricity and magnetism and mechanics. The
objective of the course is to teach the physics that an engineering student would need to have in
order to do experimental work at the nanometer scale. In addition, this course will prepare the
student to take more advanced courses in the Nanotechnology Program.

Page 2 of 2

