BIOSTATISTICS AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
(MD) {EPID}
632. STAT METH/CATEG SURV ANA. (B)
754. ADV SURVIVAL ANALYSIS. (A)
600. Data Science for Biomedical Informatics. Himes.
Data science refers broadly to using statistics and informatics techniques to gain insights from large
datasets.Biomedical informatics refers to a range of disciplines that use computational approaches to
analyze biomedical data to answer pre-specified questions as well as to discover novel hypotheses.In
this course, we will use R and other freely available software to learn fundamental data science
applied to a range of biomedical informatics topics, including those making use of health and
genomic data.After completing this course, students will be able to retrieve and clean data,perform
exploratory analyses, build models to answer scientific questions, and present visually appealing
results to accompany data analyses;be familiar with various biomedical data types and resources
related to them;and know how to create reproducible and easily shareable results with R and github.
624. Methods in PCOR. (B) Gelfand.Prerequisite(s): Permission of instructor. The goal of this course
is to provide a broad overview of methods used in patient centered outcomes research (PCOR).
Expert faculty will lecture on topics such as standards for research questions, patient centeredness,
systematic reviews, causal inference, heterogeneity of treatment effect handling missing data, data
networks, Bayesian designs, data registries, and diagnostic tests. Topics may also include advanced
observational study design, statistical methods for observational studies, health status/quality of life
as applied to PCOR and case studies of patient engagement.
625. Advanced Biostatistical Methods for Multivariable Prediction Models. (B)
Gimotty.Prerequisite(s): Completion of EPID526, EPID527 and either EPID510 or EPID623 or
equivalent preparation in either categorical analysis or survival analysis. Working knowledge of either
Stata, SAS or R to fit regression,logistic regression and/or Cox regression models. Permission of
course director for students outside of School of Medicine graduate programs.
This course is an introduction to statistical methods that can be used to evaluate biomarker
prognostic studies and multivariate prediction models. It is designed for advanced MS and PhD-level
students in epidemiology and related fields(nursing, health policy, social work, demography). Topics
will include biostatistical evaluation of biomarkers, predictive models based on various regression
modeling strategies and classification trees, assessing the predictive ability of a model; internal and
external validation of models; and updating prognostic models with new variables or for use in
different populations. Students will learn about the statistical methods that are required by current
reporting guidelines for biomarker prognostic studies or the reporting guidelines for multivariable
prediction models.
635. DATABASE BIOMED RESEARCH. (A) Holmes.
This course is intended to provide in-depth, practical exposure to the design, implementation, and
use of databases in biomedical research. This course is intended to provide students with the skills
needed to design and conduct a research project using primary and secondary data. Topics to be
covered incude: database architectures, data modeling approaches, data normalization,database
implementation, client-server databases, concurrency, validation, Structured-Query Language (SQL)
programming, reporting, maintenance, and security.All examples will use problems or data from
biomedical domains. MySQL will be used as the database platform for the course, althoughthe
principles apply generally to biomedical research and other relational databases.

Page 1 of 12

BIOSTATISTICS AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
(MD) {EPID}
672. This course is designed to teach epidemiology students the statistical principles of
analysis specific to pharmacoepidemiology study designs including the use of propensity
scores, inverse probability weighting, instrumental variables and time varying covariates.
Each of the twelve sessions includes both a lecture component and laboratory component.
Students will learn the statistical principles and then apply them to example study data sets.
(L) Ogdie-Beatty, Stephens-Sheilds.Prerequisite(s): EPID 526 and EPID 527: permission of the
instructor(s).

BIOSTATISTICS (BSTA)
509. (EPID801) Introduction to Epidemiology.
510. Introduction to Anatomy and Physiology. (A) Propert.
The purpose of this course is to introduce students without a background in medicine and biology to
the basic vocabulary and principles of human anatomy and physiology in preparation for collaborative
research in biostatistics. The course will begin with an overview of basic human biochemistry, cell
biology, and genetics. Later topics will focus on the major organ systems including circulation,
digestion and excretion, neurophysiology, and reproduction. Major disease areas of research such as
cancer and drug research will also be covered.
550. (PSYC611, STAT500) App Reg and Anal of Var.
620. Probability I. (A) Morrison.Prerequisite(s): Two semesters of calculus (through multivariable
calculus), linear algebra. This course is also offered in the Summer I session.
This course covers Elements of matrix algebra. Discrete and continuous random variables and their
distributions. Monents and moment generating functions. Joint distributions. Functions and
transformations of random variables. Law of large numbers and the central limit theorem. Point
estimation: sufficiency,maximum likelihood, minimum variance, confidence intervals.
621. Statisical Inference I. (B) Faculty.Prerequisite(s): BSTA 620.
Statistical inference including estimation, confidence intervals, hypothesis tests and non-parametric
methods.
622. Statistical Inference II. (A) Brown.Prerequisite(s): BSTA 621.
Statistical inference including estimation, confidence intervals, hypothesis tests and non-parametric
methods.

Page 2 of 12

BIOSTATISTICS AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
(MD) {EPID}
630. Statistical Methods for Data Analysis I. (A) Shults and Putt.Prerequisite(s): Multivariable
calculus and linear algebra, BSTA 620 (may be taken concurrently).
This first course in statistical methods for data analysis is aimed at first year Biostatistics degree
candidates. It focuses on the analysis of continuous data, and includes descriptive statistics, such as
central tendencies, dispersion measures, shapes of a distribution, graphical representations of
distributions, transformations, and testing for goodness of fit for a distribution. Populations, samples,
hypotheses of differences and equivalence, and errors will be defined. One and two sample t-tests,
analysis of variance, correlation, as well as non-parametric tests and correlations will be covered.
Estimation, including confidence intervals, and robust methods will be discussed. The relationship
between outcome variables and explanatory variables will be examined via regression analysis,
including single linear regression, multiple regression, model fitting and testing, partial correlation,
residuals, multicolinearity. Examples of medical and biologic data will be used throughout the course,
and use of computer software demonstrated.
752. Categorical Data Analysis II.
631. Statistical Methods and Data Analysis II. (B) Gimotty.Prerequisite(s): linear algebra, calculus,
BSTA 630, BSTA 620, BSTA 621 (may be taken concurrently).
This is the second half of the methods sequence and focuses on categorical data and survival data.
Topics in categorical data to be covered include defining rates, incidence and prevalence, the chisquared test, Fisher's exact test and its extension, relative risk and odds-ratio, sensitivity, specificity,
predictive values, logistic regression with goodness of fit tests, ROC curves, Mantel-Haenszel test,
McNemar's test, the Poisson model, and the Kappa statistic. Survival analysis will include defining
the survival curve, censoring, and the hazard function, the Kaplan-Meier estimate, Greenwood's
formula and confidence bands, the log rank test, and Cox's proportional hazards regression models.
Examples of medical and biologic data will be used throughout the course, and use of computer
software demonstrated.
651. Introduction to Linear Models and Generalized Linear Models. (B) Tu.Prerequisite(s): linear
algebra, calculus, BSTA 630, BSTA 620, BSTA 621 (may be taken concurrently).
This course extends the content on linear models in BSTA 630 and BSTA 631 to more advanced
concepts and applications of linear models. Topics include the matrix approach to linear models
including regression and analysis of variance, general linear hypothesis, estimability, polynomial,
piecewise, ridge, and weighted regression, regression and collinearity diagnostics, multiple
comparisons, fitting strategies, simple experimental designs (block designs, split plot), random effects
models, Best Linear Unbiased Prediction. In addition, generalized linear models will be introduced
with emphasis on the binomial, logit and Poisson log-linear models. Applications of methods to
example data sets will be emphasized.
690. Consulting Laboratory I. (C) Faculty.Prerequisite(s): BSTA 630.
Participation in the consulting laboratory is a requirement for both the Master's and Ph.D. degrees.
This course covers general principles of statistical consulting and statistical consulting experience.
There is training on statistical programming, preparation of reports, presentations, and the
communication aspects of consulting. Each student will be expected to join one of several project
teams consisting of faculty, research staff, and graduate student consultants; attend meetings along
with the project team and associated investigators; participate in all or part of the design,
management, analysis and reporting stages of a project; and gain valuable experience in working
with actual research projects.

Page 3 of 12

BIOSTATISTICS AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
(MD) {EPID}
774. Statistical Methods for Evaluating Diagnostic Tests. (A) Gimotty.Prerequisite(s): BSTA 510,
BSTA 630, BSTA 631 or equivalent; permission of instructor.
This course will cover statistical methodology for evaluating diagnostic tests.The topics will include:
estimation of ROC curves, comparing multiple diagnostic tests, developing diagnostic tests using
predictive models, measurement error effects on diagnostic tests, random effects models for multireader studies, verification bias in disease classification, methods for time-dependent disease
classifications, study design issues, related software, and meta-analyses for diagnostic test data.
820. (STAT972) Statistical Inference III. (B) Faculty.Prerequisite(s): To be advised.
Statistical inference including estimation, confidence intervals, hypothesis tests and non-parametric
methods.

EPIDEMIOLOGY (EPID)
Contact the department for information on courses offered in Epidemiology.
510. (BSTA511) Introductory Epidemiology. (L) Lewis.Prerequisite(s): Permission of Instructor.
This course is a series of lectures and workshops, designed to teach basic principles of
epidemiologic research design. The course provides an overview of of the types of research
questions that can be addressed by epidemiologic methods. Topics covered include: definitions of
epidemiology; measures of disease frequency;measures of effect and association; epidemiologic
study designs, bothexperimental and non-experimental; and an overview of analysis of
epidemiologicstudies.
516. Disease Ecology. Levy,Smith.
The transmission of infectious diseases is a complex and ever-changing process,and the measures
we have to protect ourselves against pathogens-vaccines,antibiotics,bed nets-can have equally
complex and unpredictable outcomes.The aim of disease ecology is to understand pathogens and
their hosts as interacting populations and to use such understanding to design rational strategies to
curb or eliminate disease transmission.
A disproportionate number of emerging infectious diseases and recent disease outbreaks in the
United States and elsewhere have shared a common characteristic-they affect veterinary as well as
human populations. Many are also vector-borne, passing between different species of hosts through
insects and other invertebrates. In some cases humans are only 'spillover hosts' whose infection is
incidental to the transmission cycle. Interdisciplinary approaches are especially important to control
such diseases. As a particular focus of the course, students will learn the tools needed for successful
collaborations to address the growing problem of zoonotic and vector-borne diseases.
518. (PUBH517) Geography & Public Health. (B)

Page 4 of 12

BIOSTATISTICS AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
(MD) {EPID}
526. Biostatistics for Epidemiologic Methods I. Bryan/Cucchiara.Prerequisite(s): Permission of
Instructor. This course runs from mid Summer to mid Fall term.There is a corresponding lab.
The first half of this will cover graphical methods, probability, discrete and continuous distributions,
estimation, confidence intervals, and one sample hypothesis testing. Emphasis is placed on
understanding the proper application and interpretation of the methods. The second half of this
course will cover two sample hypothesis testing, nonparametric techniques, sample size
determination, correlation, regression, analysis of variance, and analysis of covariance. Emphasis is
placed on understanding the proper application and underlying assumptions of the methods
presented. Laboratory sessions focus on the use of the STATA statistical package and applications to
clinical data.
550. (HPR 550) Clinical Economics and Clinical Decision Making. (B) Glick,Williams.Prerequisite
(s): Permission of Instructor.
This course focuses on the application of decision analysis and economic analysis to clinical and
policy research. The course begins with material about the selection, use, and analysis of diagnostic
tests using two by two tables, likelihood ratios, and ROC curves. The course continues with the
introduction of more general tools for decision analysis, including decision trees and other
mathematical models. Special emphasis is placed on the assessment and use of utilities in these
models. A major focus of the course is the application of economic principles to the evaluation of
health outcomes. During seminars, students will carry out practical exercises that include problem
solving, critically analyzing published articles, and learning to use computer software that facilitates
decision and economic analyses.
527. Biostatistics for Epidemiologic Methods II. Landis,Shaw. This course runs from mid fall to mid
spring term. There is a corresponding lab.
The first half of this covers concepts in biostatistics as applied to epidemiology, primarily categorical
data analysis, analysis of case-control, cross-sectional, cohort studies, and clinical trials. Topics
include simple analysis of epidemiologic measures of effect; stratified analysis; confounding;
interaction, the use of matching, and sample size determination. The second half of this course
covers concepts in biostatistics as applied to epidemiology, primarily multivariable models in
epidemiology for analyzing case-control, cross-sectional, cohort studies, and clinical trials. Topics
include logistic, conditional logistics, and Poisson regression methods; simple survival analyses
including Cox regression. Emphasis is placed on understanding the proper application and underlying
assumptions of the methods presented. Laboratory sessions focus on the use of the STATA statistical
package and applications to clinical data.
532. Database Management for Clinical Epidemiology. (B) Holmes.Prerequisite(s): Permission of
Instructor.
This course provides students with an introduction to the techniques of database management as
they apply to clinical research. Students learn how to design and implement computerized databases,
perform basic query and reporting operations, migrate data between various file formats, prepare
databases for statistical analysis, and perform quality assurance procedures. This course focuses on
the practical issues of database management and is intended to support each student's planned
research enterprise. Each class session will be preceded by a one-hour online lecture and brief selfassessment quiz to be completed prior to attending class. This lecture is intended to prepare
students for the class for the week, which will be dedicated to practical experience in a laboratory
setting.

Page 5 of 12

BIOSTATISTICS AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
(MD) {EPID}
542. Measurement of Health in Epidemiology. (A) Wiebe.Prerequisite(s): Permission of course
director. Introductory Epidemiology (EPID 510) and Biostatistics for Epidemiologic Methods I
(EPID526) previously or concurrently.
Epidemiologic analyses involve three types of procedures: measuring variables (e.g.risk factors),
estimating population parameters (e.g.risk ratios), and testing statistical hypotheses. This course
addresses the first of these procedures:measurement, which broadly encompasses the tasks
involved in obtaining data, without which analyses cannot proceed. Course topics include: defining
concepts of exposure, disease, and health; approaches to measuring exposure, which may be
personal or environmental; approaches to measuring disease and health status; assessing the
validity and reliability of measurement instruments; problems of misclassification of exposure status
and disease status and problems of missing data; instrument (e.g.questionnaire) development; and
qualitatative methods.
SM 560. Issues in Research Protocol Development. (B) Restricted to MSCE degree students
This course focuses on major issues in research protocol development, including methodological
issues regarding different research designs, development of research questions, and plans for
analysis. Each student will present his or her research proposal for open discussion during one of the
sessions.
570. Critical Appraisal of the Medical Literature. (B) Restricted to MSCE degree students.
This course focuses on techniques for critical appraisal of the medical literature. Each student will be
responsible for at least one critical appraisal session covering different epidemiologic topics.
575. Introduction to Genetic Epidemiology. (B) Rebbeck,Devoto.Prerequisite(s): Permission of
Instructor.
Recent advances have made it feasible to incorporate data on potential genetic risk factors into
traditional epidemiologic studies. Hence, there is an increasing need for epidemiologists to
understand the genetic basis of disease, read, and interpret genetic studies, and incorporate the
collection and analysis of genetic information into studies of disease etiology. The objectives of this
course are to provide epidemiologists with an understanding of: basic genetics, the tools used by
geneticists and genetic epidemiologists, and the integration of genetic data into traditional
epidemiologic study designs. After completing the course, students will be able to read and interpret
genetic studies. In addition, they will be able to design epidemiologic studies that incorporate genetic
data collection and analysis.
580. (HPR 580) Outcomes Research. (A) Silber.Prerequisite(s): EPID 526 or equivalent, EPID 527
or equivalent, Permission of Instructor.
This course is divided into two main parts. The first part addresses issues related to the
measurement of quality in healthcare. Included is a review of the classical-structure-process-outcome
quality paradigm. The paradigm's strengths and limitations are addressed. This part especially
focuses on outcome measures of quality and examines the validity of alternative measures. The
second part deals with observational, or quasi-experimental, research studies. It addresses the
advantages and limitations of alternative designs, and covers the role of clinical risk adjustment in
observational studies of medical interventions. It focuses on the problem of selection bias, and
reviews recent methods for dealing with this bias, such as instrumental variables.

Page 6 of 12

BIOSTATISTICS AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
(MD) {EPID}
623. Applied Survival Analysis. (A) Hwang.Prerequisite(s): EPID 510, EPID 526. Offered second
half of fall term
This course will focus on the specialized issues related to the analysis of survival or time-to-event
data. The course begins by closely examining the features unique to survival data which distinguishes
these data from other more familiar types. Topic include non-parametric survival analysis methods,
common survival functions, parametric survival models, the proportional hazards model, and
common model checking methods. All methods will be illustrated by in class examples and homework
sets.
582. Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. (A) Guevara, Umscheid.Prerequisite(s): EPID 510,
EPID 526 (may be taken concurrently).
This course will provide an introduction to the fundamentals of systematic reviews and meta-analysis.
It will cover introductory principles of meta-analysis; protocol development; search strategies; data
abstraction methods; quality assessment; meta-analytic methods; and applications of meta-analysis.
621. Longitudinal and Clustered Data in Epidemiologic Research. (A) Localio.Prerequisite(s):
Completion of EPID 526&527 or equivalent preparation in biostatistics, including generalized linear
models. Completion of semester course in principles of epidemiology or equivalent. Good working
knowledge of Stata and SAS and familiarity with principles of first-year calculus and matrix algebra.
Permission of course director.
An introduction to the principles of and methods for longitudinal and clustered data analysis with
special emphasis on clinical, epidemiologic, and public health applications. Designed for advanced
MS and PhD-level students in epidemiology and related fields. Marginal and conditional methods for
continuous and binary outcomes. Mixed effects and hierarchical models. Simulations for power
calculations. Each student will be required to participate in 8 labs and complete associated problem
sets. They may also use their own data to fulfill these requirements in part. Software will include Stata
and R.
622. Applied Regression Models for Categorical Data. (A) Troxel.Prerequisite(s): EPID 510, EPID
526. Offered first half of fall term
This course will provide in-depth treatment of several topics in categorical data analysis. After a brief
review of methods for contingency tables, we will introduce the idea of generalized linear models, and
focus on two special cases: multiple logistic regression and loglinear models. Each topic will be
presented in detail by stating the model and covering parameter estimation and interpretation,
inference, model building, regression diagnostics and assessment of model fit. Finally, we will cover
extensions to both models, including models for multinomial data, analysis of matched-pair data, and
random effects models. Topics will be illustrated in class with examples, and we will discuss the use
of STATA to conduct the analyses.
630. (REG 630) Clinical Trials. (B) Margolis.Prerequisite(s): EPID 510 or equivalent; EPID 526 or
equivalent; permission of instructor.
This course is to serve as a general introduction to clinical trials, with emphasis on trial design issues.
This is not a course on the biostatistics of clinical trials. It is expected that at the conclusion of the
course, a studentwill be able to plan a clinical trial. Each class will consist of a two-hour lecture
followed by a one hour discussion.

Page 7 of 12

BIOSTATISTICS AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
(MD) {EPID}
634. Clinical Trial Outcomes: Measurement, Analysis and Interpretation. (A) Farrar.Prerequisite
(s): EPID 510 or equivalent; permission of instructor.
This course is intended to teach students the skills necessary to select and/or design appropriate
outcomes for a clinical trial. Students will focus on recent changes in our understanding of clinical trial
outcome measurements, analyses, and interpretation for both subjective and objective phenomenon,
such as adherence, use of multiple outcomes, and clinical importance. While design issues for clinical
trials are the main focus, other types of clinical studies will be considered as appropriate. Student will
be expected to learn about the problems inherent in the design of outcome measures of health and
how to apply different epidemiologic and biostatistical concepts toward a solution. It is expected that
at the conclusion of the course, students will be able to plan a clinical trial with a valid, responsive,
and interpretable outcome.
636. Epidemiological Methods in Acute Care. (M)
This is an advanced course addressing epidemiological issues as they apply to important clinical
topics in acute care, including emergency, hospital, and critical care medicine Lectures and
discussions will have two primary goals: 1) to explore epidemiologic methods specific to acute care
settings (i.e., choice of outcomes, risk adjustment); and 2) to explore the epidemiology of particular
diseases (e.g., sepsis, acute lung injury, hospital acquired infections) and research questions of
current importance in these areas. This course will acquaint students with the classic literature in the
field adult and pediatric urgent care, emergency medicine, and critical care epidemiology, teach
advanced epidemiological principles using a problem-based approach, and demonstrate the
strengths and weaknesses of epidemiological research methodologies as they have been applied to
acute care.
638. Topics in Clinical Trial Design and Analysis. (A) Ellenberg.Prerequisite(s): EPID 630 or
equivalent.
This course is intended to follow, and be complementary to EPID 630: Clinical Trials. It will build on
the basic principles of design, conduct, and analysis introduced in that course and will go into more
detail on particular approaches.Topics covered will include noninferiority trials, phase 1 designs,
multi-stage and other adaptive designs, graphical data presentations and current ethical
controversies in clinical trials.
646. Reproductive EPI. (J) Barhart.
This is an advanced course that addresses epidemiological research issues as they apply to
important clinical topics in obstetrics and gynecology and related clinical disciplines. Lectures and
workshops are designed to acquaint students with seminal issues in the field of reproductive
epidemiology, to use a body of literature to demonstrate the strengths and weaknesses of
epidemiolological research designs as they have been applied to obstetrics and gynecology and
related clinical disciplines, to expose students to the range oftopics studied, to teach advanced
epidemiologic principles using a problem-based approach, and to stimulate students interested in
reproductive epidemiology to develop independent research questions.
640. Advanced Topics in Epidemiology. (B) Kanetsky.Prerequisite(s): EPID 510 or equivalent,
EPID 526 or equivalent, EPID 527 or equivalent; permission of instructor.
This course is designed to introduce students to advanced epidemiologic methods through a series
of readings and discussions. The course aims to deepen the students' understanding of important
concepts and controversies in contemporary epidemiology and to enhance their ability to think
critically about empirical epidemiologic research. The course is intended for students who are already
familiar with the fundamentals of epidemiology and biostatistics, and who wish to gain an
understanding of the complex issues underlying epidemiologic study design and interpretation.

Page 8 of 12

BIOSTATISTICS AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
(MD) {EPID}
644. Cardiopulmonary Epidemiology. (L) Kimmel.Prerequisite(s): EPID 510 or equivalent, EPID
526 or equivalent, EPID 527 or equivalent, and permission of instructor.
This is an advanced course that addresses epidemiological research issues as they apply to
important clinical topics in cardiovascular and pulmonary medicine. Lectures and workshops are
designed to acquaint students with the classic literature in the fields of cardiovascular and pulmonary
epidemiology,to use a body of literature to demonstrate the strengths and weakness of
epidemiological research designs as they have been applied to cardiovascular and pulmonary
medicine to expose students to the range of topics studied to teach advanced epidemiological
principles using a problem-based approach, and to stimulate students to develop independent
research questions.
645. (BSTA645) Research Methods in Cancer Epidemiology. (L) Schmitz.Prerequisite(s): EPID
510 or equivalent, EPID 526 or equivalent, EPID 527 or equivalent, and permission of instructor.
Research in cancer etiology, prevention, treatment, and control includes a wide range of subject
matter science, from the initial molecular changes which precede the development of cancer to
issues of primary guidelines for cancer survivors. The course reviews the possible study designs
applied to cancer etiology, prevention, treatment, and control. These include randomized controlled
trials and multiple types of observational studies (cohort, case-control, cross-sectional). Other topics
will include causal inference, bias, and effect modification.
648. Introduction to Pharmacoepidemiology I. Strom.Prerequisite(s): Permission of Instructor.
This is an advanced seminar course introducing students to the methods and approaches used in the
field of pharmacoepidemiology. Topics range from an introduction to the utility of the field; to an
overview of the different automated databases frequently used in pharmacoepidemiology research;
selected novel applications of pharmacoepidemiology; and advanced epidemiologic methods used
within pharmacoepidemiology.
649. Introduction to Pharmacoepidemiology II. Strom.Prerequisite(s): Permission of Instructor.
These seminars serve as follow-up to Topics in Pharmacoepidemiology I, continuing with topics
presented in that course.
650. Introduction to Pharmacoepidemiology III. Strom.Prerequisite(s): Permission of Instructor.
These seminars serve as follow-up to Topics in Pharmacoepidemiology II, continuing with topics
presented in that course.
652. Renal and Urologic Epidemiology. Feldman,Anderson,Yang.Prerequisite(s): EPID 510 or
equivalent, EPID 526 or equivalent, EPID 527 or equivalent, and permission of instructor.
The objective of this course is to prepare students to function as effective, independent researchers
in the fields of renal and urologic epidemiology by providing the students an understanding of how
epidemiologic research can and has advance(d) the knowledge of diseases in treatments of renal
and urologic medicine. The structure of the course consists of a lecture series, workshops, and
student presentations.

Page 9 of 12

BIOSTATISTICS AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
(MD) {EPID}
656. Research Methods in Infectious Diseases Epidemiology. (L) Gross,Lautenbach.Prerequisite
(s): EPID 510 or equivalent, EPID 526 or equivalent,a course that covers logistical regression such as
EPID 527 or equivalent,and permission of instructor(s).
This is an advanced course addressing epidemiological issues as they apply to important clinical
topics in infectious diseases. Lectures and discussions will serve two primary goals: 1) to explore
epidemiologic methods specific to infectious diseases (e.g. adherence to therapy) or which have
important applications to infectious diseases (e.g. molecular epidemiology); and 2) to explore the
epidemiology of particular infectious diseases or syndromes (e.g. HIV). This course will acquaint
students with the classic literature in the field of infectious diseases epidemiology, teach advanced
epidemiological principles using a problem-based approach, and demonstrate the strengths and
weaknesses of research methodologies as they have been applied to infectious diseases.
658. Gastroenterology EPI. (K) Yang.Prerequisite(s): EPID 510 or equivalent, EPID 526 or
equivalent, EPID 527 or equivalent, and permission of instructor.
This course provides an in-depth presentation of advanced methodological issues in conducting
clinical epidemiological research in the field of gastroenterology.
690. Empirical Bioethics. (J) Halpern,Karlawish.Prerequisite(s): Permission of Instructor.
Solutions to many of the most pressing problems in modern bioethics require empirically testing
assumptions and theories about human behaviors and attitudes. This course will use papers from the
primary literature to teach students to understand and use the many methods that have been or
could be employed to address questions lying at the intersection of ethics and clinical research. In
addition to participating in weekly discussions of these topical and methodological papers, students
will be expected to develop and present a protocol for research designed to explore ethical dilemmas
within their own disciplines.
664. Methods in Neurologic Clinical Epidemiology. (J) Balcer,Farrar.Prerequisite(s): Permission of
Instructor.
This course will introduce students to methods and study design principles that are specific or unique
to clinical research and trials in neurology, child neurology,neuro-ophthalmology, neurosurgery, and
related fields.
666. Pharmacoepidemiology Research Methods. (B) Hennessy.Prerequisite(s): EPID 510 or
equivalent, EPID 526 or equivalent,a course that covers logistical regression such as EPID 527 or
equivalent,and permission of instructor(s).
The purpose of this course is to explore and integrate concepts and considerations that are key to the
conduct of pharmacoepidemiologic research. The format will be a mixture of seminar, instructor-led
discussion, student-led discussion, and student presentations. Papers from the applied and methods
literature will be used to illustrate concepts and as springboards for discussion. Topics covered
include use of automated databases, pharmacogenomics,and approaches to addressing
confounding.

Page 10 of 12

BIOSTATISTICS AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
(MD) {EPID}
6 7 5 . A dva n c e d M e t h o d s fo r A n a ly s i s o f C o m p l ex
Rebbeck,Devoto.Prerequisite(s): Permission of Instructor(s).

Genetic

Tr a i t s .

(M)

The recent explosion in the availability of molecular level data coupled with technological
advancements allowing for large-scale sequencing creates an exciting opportunity to tailor treatment
decisions to the specific genetic characteristics of a patient. Epidemiologic studies will provide the
tools to draw from this array of molecular data as well as well-established environmental risk factors
to predict disease outcomes. However, understanding analytic methods for characterizing the
complex interactions among genetic polymorphisms, biomarkers,environmental factors, and disease
outcomes is imperative to draw meaningful and relevant conclusions from these studies. Through this
course, students will understand and present advanced statistical methods and how they can be
applied tothe study of complex genetic traits.
SM 700. Doctoral Seminar in Epidemiology. Levy.Prerequisite(s): Permission of Instructor.
Restricted to Epidemiology Doctoral Students
The course is intended to meet the needs of PhD students over the entire program from the
coursework phase through the dissertation defense, and is intended to optimize cross-fertilization
between the students at all phases of their program.
SM 714. Grant Writing/Review. (L) Farrar.Prerequisite(s): EPID510, EPID526, EPID560, and
EPID570 or Permission of Instructor.
This course is designed to provide background, and guidance on writing and submitting NIH grants.
Students will submit a mini proposal at the beginning of the term. Each proposal will be reviewed by a
group of students from the class and scores will be given. The final project will be a full NIH proposal
ready for submission.
721. Longitudinal and Clustered Data in Epidemiologic Research-Advanced Topics. (M)
Localio,Joffe.Prerequisite(s): EPID621 or a class in longitudinal data at the graduate level, Familiarity
with principles of first-year calculus and matrix algebra, Good working knowledge of Stata (or SAS)
and access to Stata v10 license (intercooled or SE or MP), or to SAS v9.2 license,Permission of
instructor.
Advanced methods for longitudinal and clustered data analysis with special emphasis on formal
principles of causal inference, analysis of complex samples from surveys, use of Monte Carlo
methods of estimation, and methods for adjusting for missing data and dropout, with applications in
epidemiology, social sciences,and public health. Designed for advanced MS and PhD-level students
in epidemiology and related fields. Each student will be required to participate in 6 labs and to
complete the associated problem sets and exercises. Students must satisfy part of this requirement
by working on their own datasets.
805. Practicum In Applied Clinical Research Methods.
813. Biostatistics in Practice Lab. Faculty.
SM 816. Economic Evaluation of Medical Therapies. Faculty.
817. Fund of Pharmacoepi..
848. Topics in Pharmacoepi I..
866. Pharmacoepidemiology Res..

Page 11 of 12

BIOSTATISTICS AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
(MD) {EPID}

Page 12 of 12

