FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
034. (ENGL034, HIST034) Cultures of the Book. (A)
This course focuses upon the making, remaking, dissemination, and reading of texts in early modern
Europe and America. Topics will include: practices of reading; learning to write; the constitution of
authorship; the interaction of printing and manuscript; the economics of printing and publishing; the
transatlantic book trade. Texts for the course will include: Shakespeare, Venus and Adonis and 1 and 2
Henry IV; Mary Rowlandson, The Sovereignty and Goodness of God; Alexander Pope, The Dunciad;
Samuel Richardson, Pamela; Benjamin Franklin, Autobiography; the Constitution of the United States.
SM 061. (CINE061, FNAR661, VLST261) Video I. (C) Course Fee $75.00
In this studio based course, students are introduced to video production and postproduction as well as
to selected historical and theoretical texts addressing the medium of video. Students will be taught
basic camera operation, sound recording and lighting, as well as basic video and sound editing and
exporting using various screening and installation formats. In addition to a range of short assignmentbased exercises, students will be expected to complete three short projects over the course of the
semester. Critiques of these projects are crucial to the course as students are expected to speak at
length about the formal, technical, critical and historical dimensions of their works. Weekly readings in
philosophy, critical theory, artist statements and literature are assinged. The coruse will also include
weekly screenings of films and videos, introducing students to the history of video art as well as to
other contemporary practices.
If you need assistance registering for a closed section, please email the department at
fnarug@design.upenn.edu
SM 062. (CINE062, FNAR662) Video II. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 061. Course Fee $75.00
Video II offers opportunities to further explore the role of cinematic narrative technique, non-narrative
forms, digital video cinematography, editing, and screen aesthetics. Through a series of several video
projects and a variety of technical exercises, students will refine their ability to articulate technically
and conceptually complex creative projects in digital cinema. In addition, one presentation on a
contemporary issue related to the application of cinematic storytelling and/or the cultural context of
digital video is required.
SM 063. (CINE063, FNAR663) Documentary Video. (A) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 061. Course Fee
$75.00
Documentary Video is an intensive production course involving the exploration of concepts,
techniques, concerns, and aesthetics of the short form documentary. Building on camera, sound, and
editing skills acquired in Video I, students will produce a portfolio of short videos and one longer
project over the course of the semester using advanced level camera and sound equipment. One short
presentation on a genre, technique, maker, or contemporary concern selected by the student is
required.
SM 065. (CINE065, FNAR665) Cinema Production. (A) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 061. Course Fee
$75.00
This course focuses on the practices and theory of producing narrative based cinema. Members of the
course will become the film crew and produce a short digital film. Workshops on producing, directing,
lighting, camera, sound and editing will build skills necessary for the hands-on production shoots.
Visiting lecturers will critically discuss the individual roles of production in the context of the history of
film.

Page 1 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
SM 067. (CINE067, FNAR667) Advanced Video Projects. (M) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 062.
This course is structured to create a focused environment and support for individual inquiries and
projects. Students will present and discuss their work in one to one meetings with the instructor and in
group critiques. Readings, screenings, and technical demonstrations will vary depending on students'
past history as well as technical, theoretical, and aesthetic interests. Course approval will be based on
application prior to the beginning of the semester.
SM 068. (CINE068, FNAR668) Cinematography. (B) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 061.
This course will be a technical, practical and aethetic exploration of the art of cinematography as it
pertains to film and digital video. Through screenings, in-class excercises and assignments, students
will increase their Video I skills in lighting and cinematography as a form of visual expression. Topics
covered include shot composition, camera movement, lenses, filtration and color, exposure, lighting
techniques, location shooting and how to use grip equipment. Discussions, demos and lectures will
include relevant and illustrative historical motion picture photography, current digital video technology,
and examples that explore interactions between film and video.
SM 070. (CINE070, FNAR671) Film Sound: History, Aesthetics and Subversion. (C) Novack.
Course Fee $75.00
Sound and Image as experienced in the cinema, are not divisible. One perception influences the other,
and transforms it. While a preexisting harmony between these two senses may exist, its conventions
are subject to manipulation and the whims of subversion. Film Sound tracks the technological and
aesthetic history of sound for film including psychoacoustics, dialogue, music, sound fx and audio's
gradual and triumphant march towards fidelity, stereo and surround sound. This lecture course,
through an historical and pedagogical romp loaded with examples throughout film history and visits by
lauded audio professionals from the film world, seeks to instruct students to engage in the process of
sound perception, gaining an appreciation for the art of sound as it relates to the varied
phenomenological dimensions of that unique audio-visual encounter we call movies.
073. (FNAR673) Machine for Seeing: Architecture and the Moving Image. (B) Hartt.Prerequisite(s):
FNAR 061. Course Fee $75.00
Architecture's relationship with cinema was established with the very first motion picture. In Sortie de
l'usine Lumiere de Lyon by Auguste and Louis Lumiere we see a didactic presentation of film titles as
workers from the Lumiere brother's factory stream forth from its interior at days end. In many ways the
context of the film is its subject as well. The title of the class plays on Le Corbusier's maxim that
architecture is machine for living and perhaps cinema is simply a machine for helping us understand
the vast construct of our built environment. A device, which allows us to imagine even greater follies or
more importantly to think critically about architecture's relationship with and impact on society.
Readings, screenings, discussions and critiques make up the curriculum along with studio time.
Students will produce their own film and we will look at films produced by a range of practioners: From
architects speculating on the nature of and use of public space and urban development to
documentarians researching the pathologies of neo-liberalism and its effect on the privatization of
space. We will also look at the work of artists who engage with the poetics of space and who unpack
the conflicted legacies of the built environment

Page 2 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
074. (FNAR674) A Virus in the Culture: Social Critique in Media Arts. (A) David Hartt and Marks
Owens.Prerequisite(s): FNAR 061 or permission from instructor.
In order to change the world, we must first learn how to infect it. A Virus in the Culture is a studio class
that examines and generates various forms of media resistance to dominant hegemonic systems of
power and control. Using filmmaking, publication design and interactive media we'll think through and
develop responses to some of the most pressing issues facing us today. We'll look at historical models
from the agitprop design work of Gee Vaucher for Anarcho-punk band Crass to Chris Marker's film Le
Fond de L'Air Est Rouge, a radical analysis of global social and political turmoil in the late 60s and
early 70s. We'll also look at experimental contemporary design firms like Metahaven who question the
role of designers and filmmakers today - Bypassing the power dynamics of clients and briefs they took
it upon themselves to create a graphic identity for WikiLeaks. Each example broadens the definition
and possibilities of practice to create a more porous engagement with audiences and users while
informing the practice of social critique today. Considering a diverse range of topics from education
policy, to the rights of environmental refugees, we'll use the class to workshop a singular
comprehensive project that targets researches and responds to a specific contested position. The
outcome of which will be a class produced short film,
publication and website that unpacks the social, cultural, and economic complexities of our subject.
This class is co-taught by David Hartt, an artist and filmmaker along with graphic designer, Mark
Owens. Reading, screenings, discussions and critiques make up the curriculum along with studio time.
While the focus of this course is not technical, prior knowledge of design programs, camera functions,
and post-production techniques is expected.
SM 075. (CINE075, FNAR675) Image and Sound Editing. (B) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 061. Course
Fee $75.00
This course presents an in-depth look at the storytelling power of image and sound in both narrative
and documentary motion pictures. Students apply a theoretical framework in ongoing workshops,
exploring practical approaches to picture editing and sound design. Students edit scenes with a variety
of aesthetic approaches, and create story-driven soundtracks with the use of sound FX, dialogue
replacement, foleys, music and mixing. Students not only learn critical skills that expand creative
possibilities, but also broaden their understanding of the critical relationship between image and
sound.
085. (FNAR585) Performance Studio. (B) Hayes.Prerequisite(s): One previous studio course (such
as FNAR 123, FNAR145, FNAR150, or FNAR061) or permission from the instructor. Course Fee
$75.00
This course supports the individual and collaborative production of performance works. As the medium
of performance consists of diverse forms, actions, activities, practices and methodologies, the course
allows for an open exploration in terms of material and form. Students are invited to utilize
technologies, materials and methodologies from other mediums and/or disciplines such as video,
photography, writing and sound. In addition to the production component, the course will examine
multiple histories of performance through readings, screenings and directed research.

Page 3 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
SM 100. Knowing the Contemporary Art World. (C)
This course introduces the student to the world of contemporary art, as it is comprised by a global
community of leading artists, curators, writers, art historians and collectors within a network of
galleries, museums and other institutional contexts. Contemporary art has become an increasingly
important marker of a city (and nation's) economic development. According to economist and social
scientist Richard Florida, contemporary art activity is an expression of a city's Creative Class, the
generators of cultural and economic innovation. But what exactly is this world of contemporary art?
The course begins by distinguishing between modern and contemporary art. There will be a teasing
out of the issues from modern art that remain unresolved for contemporary art.
Students will study the key pre-occupations that are spurring much contemporary art production,
including issues relating to identity in the age of globalization. A question that will be studied in this
course relates to theways in which artists have responded to dominant narratives of globalization.
Additionally, another important question would look into how the artist's role has changed in the new
globalized context of art production and circulation (including the rise of the art biennale.) By taking
this course, students gain understanding into the constitution and of the contemporary art world and
the key issues at play within it. There will be several trips to exhibitions to be announced.
123. (FNAR523, VLST253) Drawing I. (C)
This course is designed to develop visual awareness and perceptual acuity through the process of
drawing. Students learn to sharpen perceptual skills through observational drawing, and to explore the
expressive potential of drawing. A variety of problems and media will be presented in order to
familiarize students with various methods of working and ways of communicating ideas visually.
Subject matter will include object study, still life, interior and exterior space, self-portrait and the figure.
Different techniques and materials (charcoal, graphite, ink, collage) are explored in order to
understand the relationship between means, material and concept. Critical thinking skills are
developed through frequent class critiques and through the presentation of and research into historical
and contemporary precedent in drawing.
If you need assistance registering for a closed section, please email the department at
fnarug@design.upenn.edu
142. (FNAR542) 3-D Design. (C)
Students will make work that draws from and interacts with the three-dimensional world we live in.
Formal strategies will explore principles of organization. Planar construction, modeling and
assemblage methods will be used for investigations spanning from bas-relief to environmental art. This
is a "learn by doing" process with no prerequisites.
124. (FNAR524) Drawing Investigations. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 123.
Drawing is a fundamental means of visualization and a hub for thinking, constructing, and engaging in
a wide variety of creative activities and problemsolving. This studio class explores drawing in both its
traditional and contemporary forms. The projects are designed to help students in all disciplines find
ways express and clarify their ideas through the process of drawing. The semester begins with the
refinement of perceptual skills acquired in Drawing I, while encouraging experimentation through the
introduction of color, abstract agendas, conceptual problem solving, and collaborative exercises, as
well as new materials, techniques and large format drawings. Particular attention is given to ways to
conduct visual research in the development of personal imagery. Assignments are thematic or
conceptually based with ample opportunity for individual approaches to media, subject, scale and
process. The goal is to strengthen facility, develop clarity in intent and expand expression. Attention is
paid to the development of perceptual sensitivity, methods of imagage construction, and the processes
of synthesis and transformation in order tocommunicate ideas through visual means. Recommended
for students in all areas.

Page 4 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
126. (FNAR526) Sequential Drawing. (B) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 123.
Sequential drawing instructs in the visualization of story telling through the exploration of visual
narrative components (visual iconography, panel- to-panel transition types, picture/word relations) and
their application to a narrative through the use of formal drawing techniques (composition, color,
perspective, line, form). The class begins with various exercises in paneling, pacing and style
development, and concludes with the student applying the concepts and techniques they've acquired
to the creation of a graphic novel.
SM 130. Writing on the City: Letterforms, Technology and Philadelphia Culture. (A) Comberg.
This seminar explores the rich history of writing and typography from colonial to contemporary
Philadelphia through primary source research at the city's many libraries and collections and through
direct engagement with professional designers, crafts workers, and manufacturers. The course will be
divided into two parts. The first phase will be devoted to information gathering: lectures, readings, and
visits, including presentations, demonstrations, and hands-on research. Students will keep a journal of
their inquiries and regularly share their insights during class sessions, developing a plan for final
documentation. In the second phase students will synthesize and distill their research, developing
theories, defining individual and group projects, and collectively writing, designing, and publishing a
public framework (web/print/exhibition, etc.) to chronicle their scholarship.
145. (FNAR545, VLST252) Sculpture Practices. (C)
As an introduction to traditional and contemporary three-dimensional practice, this course is concerned
with the concepts and methodologies surrounding three-dimensional art making in our time. Students
experiment with a variety of modes of production, and develop some of the fundamental techniques
used in sculpture. In addition to these investigations, assignments relative to the history and social
impact of these practices are reinforced through readings and group discussion. Processes covered
include use of the Fab Lab, wood construction, clay, paper, mixed media, and more.
If you need assistance registering for a closed section, please email the department at
fnarug@design.upenn.edu
150. (VLST260) Photography Practices. (C) Course Fee $75.00
This course is an introduction to the basic principles, strategies and processes of photographic
practice. It is designed to broaden the student's aesthetic explorations and to help the student develop
a visual language based on cross-disciplinary artistic practice. Through a series of projects and
exercises students will be exposed to a range of camera formats, techniques and encouraged to
experiment with the multiple modes and roles of photography - both analogue and digital. Attention will
also be given to developing an understanding of critical aesthetic and historical issues in photography.
Students will examine a range of historical and contemporary photowork as an essential part of
understanding the possibilities of image making. This course is primarily for freshman and
sophomores.
If you need assistance registering for a closed section, please email the department at
fnarug@design.upenn.edu

Page 5 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
231. (FNAR531) Painting Practices. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 123.
Painting practices is an introduction to the methods and materials of oil painting. This course begins
with an investigation of color and color relationships. The beginning of the semester will cover technical
issues and develop the student's ability to create a convincing sense of form in space using mass,
color, light and composition. The majority of work is from direct observation including object study, still
life, landscape, interior and exterior space and the self portrait. Class problems advance sequentially
with attention paid to perceptual clarity, the selection and development of imagery, the process of
synthesis and translation, color, structure and composition, content and personal expression. Students
will become familiar with contemporary and art historical precedent in order to familiarize them with the
history of visual ideas and find appropriate solutions to their painting problems.
220. (FNAR620) Producing Ephemera: Letterpress, Risopgraph, Inkjet, Xerox. (A) Romberger.
This studio course introduces students to the world of printmaking and circulation through techniques
in letterpress and Risograph (a high-speed digital printing system developed in Japan in the 1980s), in
addition to Xerox, laser, inkjet, and off-set printing, focusing particularly on the format of prints, artists'
ephemera, and the role of ephemera in understanding culture. Studnets will create their own
broadsides, flyers, announcement cards, and independent publications throughout the course,
exploring ways in which artists, designers, musicians, and activists make or have made use of the print
to disseminate information; initiate happenings; advertise events; or format change. Studnets will learn
about some of the most significant producers working within this realm - from Conceptualists to punk
bands - and develop skills in page layout, typography, and design; mechanized and hand-pulled press
operations; and digital to analog pre-press and post-print production methods.
This course is designed for highly motivated students and requires out-of-class time commitment.
However, no prior coursework is required. Students from all levels and backgrounds are encourged to
register. The course employs combined collaborative / self-directed approaches to learning to enhance
students' understandings of ways in which print media and multiples serve as vital conduits for
disseminating ideas involving visual art, popular culture, literature, politics, performance and many
other topics students will wish to explore.
SM 222. (FNAR622, URBS322) The Big Picture: Mural Arts in Philadelphia. (C)
The history and practice of the contemporary mural movement couples step by step analysis of the
process of designing with painting a mural. In addition students will learn to see mural art as a tool for
social change. This course combines theory with practice. Students will design and paint a large
outdoor mural in West Philadelphia in collaboration with Philadelphia high school students and
community groups. The class is co-taught by Jane Golden, director of the Mural Arts Program in
Philadelphia, and Shira Walinsky, a mural arts painter and founder of Southeast by Southeast project,
a community center for Burmese refugees in South Philadelphia.
227. Writing with Pictures: Children's Picture Books. (C) Edgerton.
A children's picture book is a unique book form in that it is written with pictures. Words, if used at all,
serve to illustrate what the picture cannot say. In this course students will learn the complexities of
designing what looks to be, a simple picture book for children. Visualizing the story begins with both
writing and drawing prompts, image collecting, and exposure to a range of children's literature.
Students will learn to sequence a main character and an environment into a storyboard through stages
of changes towards a resolution. By the end of the semester students will have a good understanding
of how a picture book works, with a personal "dummy" book well on its way. This course will include
two guest artists.

Page 6 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
232. (FNAR532) Painting Studio. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 231. This course can be continued by
registering for FNAR 333 Painting Studio (III), and FNAR 334 Painting Studio (IV).
Painting Studio presents an ongoing exploration of the techniques, problems and poetics of painting,
the nuances of the painting language, and the development of a personal direction. A wide variety of
problems will address such issues as color, composition, and the development of imagery, process,
and content. Students are expected to improve in technical handling of paints and move towards
developing personal modes of seeing, interpreting, and thinking for themselves. This course introduces
different topics, strategies and individual challenges each semester, so it may be repeated with
advanced course numbers.
233. (FNAR633) Digital Illustration. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 264 and FNAR 123. Course Fee
$75.00
Digital Illustration is a course designed to expose students to the diverse techniques and approaches
used in creating digital illustration for print publication. Course assignments will include twodimensional animation storyboard rendering, figure illustration, technical diagram illustration,
photographic retouching and enhancing. Digital applications will include morphing with layers, surface
cloning, three-dimensional modeling and spatial transformation of scenes and objects. Students
completing this course will possess the capability to design and plan creatively and skillfully execute
finished artwork.
234. (FNAR634) Art of the Web: Interactive Concepts for Art & Design. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR
264. Course Fee $75.00
Art of the Web: Interactive concepts for art and design is a first step in learning how tocreate, analyze
and discuss interactive content, as a visual creator. It is an exploration of the culture of the internet, the
ideas behind its quirks, the dreams and freedoms it encapsulates, and the creative power it gives to us.
Students will be assigned projects that will challenge their current understanding of the web, and the
ways it shapes human connectivity and interaction. Upon completion of this course, students will
possess a working knowledge how to organize and design websites and learn to critique web-content
including navigation, UX design and information ? ?architecture. The course will require analytical and
conceptual skills and foster creative thinking.
SM 238. (FNAR538) Open Book. (A) Course Fee $75.00
"Open Book" will focus on visual communication of information. It will address two methods of inquiry
and the corresponding means of visual representation: the objective, well structured research of facts
and images, and the creative process of their subjective evaluation and restatement. Students will
propose a topic based on their area of interest and engage in a focused, semester-long exploration,
which they will present in the form of a designed and printed book.
235. (FNAR635) 3-D Computer Modeling. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 123 and FNAR 264. Course Fee
$75.00
Students will develop a comprehensive knowledge of how virtual worlds are constructed using
contemporary computer graphics technique with a fine arts perspective. The course will offer the
opportunity to explore the construction, texturing, and rendering of forms, environments, and
mechanisms while conforming to modeling specifications required for animation, real-time simulations
or gaming environments, and rapid prototyping.

Page 7 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
236. (FNAR536) Digital Figure Modeling. (B) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 235. Course Fee $75.00
This course introduces methods of modeling, texturing, and rendering human and animal figures.
Students will study anatomical bone and muscle structures, and then employ this knowledge as they
develop polygonal models for real-time 3D simulations or gaming environments, high-resolution
renderings, and rapid prototyping.
SM 239. Photographic Thinking.
This course will explore the vitality and range of photography as a discursive practice by analyzing the
way images are structured and deployed in contemporary art and wider media culture. Students will be
introduced to the key issues surrounding photography now- led through these questions by lectures,
readings, group discussion and project-based work. A series of photo-assignments challenge the
students to integrate critical thought with practice, exploring a range of formal strategies and thematic
frameworks that affect the meaning of their images. Students should have a strong interest in
philosophy and art histories (especially the history of photography.) They should be motivated to work
independently & experiment creatively. There are no prerequisites for this course. It is intended for all
different levels of technical experience, but the minimum requirements are a digital camera, a basic
familiarity with Photoshop and access to a computer with imaging software.
241. (FNAR541) Hand-Drawn Computer Animation. (M) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 264. Course Fee
$75.00
Using software tools designed for hand-drawn animation, students will develop animation skills
applicable to all forms of animation. In this course students will learn to draw with a sense of urgency
and purpose as they represent motion and drama in a series of frames. Through careful study of
natural movements, precedents in the history of animation, and through the completion of a series of
animation projects students will develop strategies for representing naturalistic movement, inventing
meaningful transformations of form, and storytelling.
243. (FNAR543) Figure Sculpture I. (B) Course Fee $75.00
An introduction of modeling the human figure in clay. Students will work from the live model,
acquainting themselves with issues of basic anatomy, form and function, and clay modeling. No
previous experience is required; drawing experience a plus.
245. (FNAR645) Book and Publication Design. (A) Hyland.Prerequisite(s): FNAR 264 or permission
from the instructor.
Book and Publication Design will focus on the theory and professional practice of designing multi-page
publications. Students will analyze formal structures of different types of books-literature and poetry,
fiction and non-fiction compilations, illustrated volumes such as art catalogues, monographs and
textbooks, and serial editions-discussing both traditional and experimental approaches. The format of
the course will be split between theoretical and historical evaluations of book formats by drawing on
the Van Pelt Rare Book Collection-and studio time where students will design books with attention to
the format's conceptual relationship to the material at hand with a focus on typography and page
layout, as well as on understanding production methods of printing and binding. In addition to the
conventions of page layout students will examine paratextual elements (title page, practices of
pagination and other internal structuring, content lists and indexes, colophons, notes and marginalia,
end-leaves, binding, etc.).

Page 8 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
247. (FNAR547) Environmental Animation. (B) Landau.Prerequisite(s): Experience in landscape
architecture, architecture, animation, programming, film, Photoshop, or graphic design is strongly
encouraged but not required.
This studio-based course examines the disciplinary spaces of landscape, art, and architecture through
the medium of 3D animation and storytelling. We immerse ourselves in environments that may be as
small as a cell or as large as a planet. From the refiguring of images, models, graphic design, or video
to visualization or coding the genesis of whole environments, this course will allow for a variety of entry
point for students of different disciplines and skill levels. Projects will range in scope from animated
GIFs to animated shorts.
This course embraces a spirit of invention, collaborative learning, and interdisciplinary crosspollination. Experience in landscape architecture, architecture, animation, programming, film, GIS, and/
or graphic design is encouraged. We will examine and discuss some standard typologies such as the
walk-through, data-visualization, as well as filmic and avant garde strategies as starting points for
creative reinterpretation of space. We will primarily be using 3D Studio Max and After Effects with
support from Next Engine 3D Scanner, Rhino, and Grasshopper. Scripting will be included in most
assignments to enhance artistic control of the software.
253. (FNAR553) Advanced Projects in Printmaking. (B) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 252 or FNAR 257
and FNAR 251. Course Fee $75.00
This course will concentrate on expanding imagery in print media. The course requires the proposal of
a directed final project to be developed during the semester. Three initial exploratory projects will
culminate in the final. Projects are open to all print media, but there will be an emphasis on screen
printing. Techniques will be addressed as they serve the needs of ideas rather than a set technical
procedure. Through individual consultation, scheduled class critiques, and field trips, attention will be
given to studio work in and out of printmaking so that the technical and conceptual strengths of print
media can serve as a worthwhile adjunct to an overall studio practice.
250. (FNAR550, VLST250) Introduction to Printmaking. (B) Course Fee $75.00
The course offers an introduction to several forms of printmaking including: intaglio, screen printing,
relief, and monoprinting. Through in-class demonstrations students are introduced to various
approaches to making and printing in each medium. The course enhances a student's capacity for
developing images through two-dimensional design and conceptual processes. Technical and
conceptual skills are developed through discussions and critiques.
If you need assistance registering for a closed section, please email the department at
fnarug@design.upenn.edu
251. (FNAR551) Printmaking: Etching. (C) Course Fee $75.00
The class will challenge the possibilities of experimental drawing and ways of creating incisions and
textures using copper plates as the matrix, which then will be printed on paper and other materials.
The class offers full technical and historical description of each individual process: Dry Point, Etching,
Hard ground, Soft Ground, Aquatint, Shine Cole', Spit-Biting, Sugar Lift, Color Printing and Viscosity
printing.

Page 9 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
252. (FNAR552) Printmaking: Relief & Screen Printing. (C) Course Fee $75.00
This course is an introduction to technical skills and investigative processes in screen printing and
relief and examines methods for combining digital technology with traditional print media. The course
introduces students to several contemporary applications of silkscreen and relief printmaking including
techniques in multi-color printing, photo-based silkscreening, digital printing, woodcut, linocut, and
letterpress. Demonstrations include photo and image manipulation, color separating and output
techniques, hand carving and printing, as well as drawing and collage. Both traditional and
experimental approaches are explored and encouraged and technical and conceptual skills are
developed through discussions and critiques.
254. (FNAR654) Printmaking & Publications: Intro to Independent Publishing and Artists'
Publications. (B) Romberger.
This course introduces students to independent publishing and artists' publications through print
methods in letterpress, Risograph, and Xerox. The class will focus on the self-published artists' zine/
book as an affordable, accessible, and easily reproducible format for exploring ideas, disseminating
artists' work, and collaborating across disciplines. Students will learn a range of skills, including
techniques in both mechanized and hand-pulled forms of printed media (Risograph, copy machine,
Vandercook letterpress); short- run editions and binding; design and layout; pre-press and print
production; and the web as it relates to and supports independent and democratic modes of
distribution. Students will learn about and become acquainted with some of the most significant
independent publishers working today and throughout history. Students will leave class having
completed three individual projects: a 16-page booklet/zine; a carefully considered online publication,
and a final collaborative book designed, developed and published as a class. The course commences
with a field trip to New York City's Printed Matter, one of the oldest and most important nonprofit
facilities dedicated to the promotion of artists' books, where students will be encouraged to submit a
publication by semester's end.
257. (FNAR557) Printmaking: Mixed Media. (C) Course Fee $75.00
This course will explore the interplay of analog and digital processes and products of printing through
various media, technology and conceptual approaches. In this changing world of communication,
explore the intersection of old and new media to fabricate new and experimental design for print media.
Using the printshop, the computer, and the equipment in the fabrication lab as our interface for
exploration, we will focus on text and image relationships by integrating design, typography, print, and
digital systems in a printing workshop environment. This course begins with an exploration of
processes and experimentation, resulting in the creation of an edition that is conceptually centered on
individual interests that engage the senses, the imagination, and the intellect.
258. (FNAR558) Introduction to Clay: the Potter's Wheel and Beyond. (C) FNAR Faculty. Course
Fee $75.00
In this introductory clay class, students will learn all the fundamental skills needed to create threedimensional forms in clay using a variety of methods: wheel throwing, handbuilding (such as coil
building and slab construction), and press molding. Whether creating utilitarian forms or creating
sculpture, projects are designed to strengthen both craftsmanship and individual creativity. In addition
to developing a working knowledge of the ceramic process, including surface treatments and glazing,
students will also be introduced to design issues as well as contemporary art/ceramics topics that
influence our aesthetic sensibilities. No prerequisites.

Page 10 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
266. (FNAR566) Graphic Design with Creative Technologies. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 264/636.
Course Fee $75.00
The aim of this course is to introduce students creative ways to use color, typography, and layout
across new materials and media, ranging from print to physical objects. Students will explore visual
design through a set of assignments and projects that are geared towards exploring the role of design
in visual arts, interaction design, media design and architecture. The course introduces a number of
design concepts such as content organization, navigation, interaction and data-driven design and
show ways to develop new design metaphors, presentation techniques, and imagery using old and
new technologies. course is structured as a combination of lectures and hands on workshops where
students will have the chance to work both individually and collaboratively to realize their projects.
259. (FNAR559) Beginning Clay: Handbuilding and Casting Techniques. (C) FNAR Faculty. Course
Fee $75.00
Modeling and casting are fundamental methods of object-making. Students will learn basic
handbuilding techniques such as coil building, slab construction, and mold making through
assignments that incorporate conceptual and technical issues. Through experimentation with these
methods, this course promotes an understanding of materials, processes, visual concepts, and
techniques for creating three-dimensional forms in space. In addition to using different water-based
clays and plaster, other materials such as wax, plastiline, paper pulp, cardboard, and tar paper will be
explored. No prerequisites.
263. (FNAR563) Advanced Wheel Studio. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 261. Course Fee $75.00
This course teaches students more advanced wheel throwing techniques while helping to develop their
critical skills in other areas of ceramic work. Students will learn to throw, employing larger masses of
clay, and to increase the complexity of their work by combining and altering thrown parts. There will be
an emphasis on experimentation in surface treatment and design, the goal of which is to expand a
student's ability to create more complicated and personalized clay works. In addition to learning the
technical knowledge, there will be critical discussions of contemporary ceramics issues through image
presentations, reading materials and field trips.
264. (FNAR636, VLST264) Art, Design and Digital Culture. (C) Course Fee $75.00
This course is an introduction to the fundamental perception, representation, aesthetics, and design
that shape today's visual culture. It addresses the way artists and designers create images; design with
analog and digital tools; communicate, exchange, and express meaning over broad range of media;
and find their voices within the fabric of contemporary art, design, and visual culture. Emphasis is
placed on building an extended form of visual literacy by studying and making images using a variety
of representation techniques; learning to organize and structure two-dimensional and threedimensional space, and designing with time-based and procedural media. Students learn to develop
an individual style of idea-generation, experimentation, iteration, and critique as part of their creative
and critical responses to visual culture.
If you need assistance registering for a closed section, please email the department at
fnarug@design.upenn.edu
267. (CINE267, FNAR567) Computer Animation. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 264. Course Fee $75.00
Through a series of studio projects this course introduces techniques of 2D and 3D computer
animation. Emphasis is placed on time-based design and storytelling through animation performance
and montage. Students will develop new sensitivities to movement, composition, cinematography,
editing, sound, color and lighting.

Page 11 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
268. (FNAR568, IPD 568) Integrative Design Studio: Biological Design. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR
264. Course Fee $75.00
This course is a research-based design studio that introduces new materials, fabrication, and
prototyping techniques to develop a series of design proposals in response to the theme: Biological
Design. The studio introduces life sciences and biotechnologies to designers, artists, and nonspecialists to develop creative and critical propositions that address the social, cultural, and
environmental needs of the 21st century. The course will be a pilot study of the first biodesign
challenge organized by CUT/PASTE/GROW. The final projects will be submitted to a competition and
the winning entry will be featured at Biofabricate in Summer 2017.
269. (FNAR569) Typography. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 264. Course Fee $75.00
The study and practice of typography spans the history of individual letterforms through the typesetting
of full texts. It is a complete immersion into type as an integral part of visual communication.
Typesetting conventions and variables including legibility, readability, texture, color and hierarchy will
be stressed, as well as a form for organizing information and expressing visual ideas. Studio work will
include collecting and analyzing type, designing an original typeface, researching type history and
experimenting with typographic forms.
270. (FNAR570) Graphic Design Practicum. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 266 or FNAR 269. Course
Fee $75.00
Practicum provides a real world experience for students interested in solving design problems for nonprofit and community organizations. The studio works with two clients each semester, and previous
projects have included print design, web design, interpretive signage and exhibit interactives. All
projects are real and will result in a portfolio-ready finished product. Students will participate in a full
design experience including design, client interaction, presentations, production, and project
management. In addition, students will take field trips, meet professionals and go on studio visits.
SM 278. (FNAR578) Documentary Strategies. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 271 or FNAR 340 or
Permission from Instructor. Course Fee $75.00
This course offers a context for photographers to develop a documentary project - either within a
traditional photojournalistic framework or one that challenges these traditions. The aim is to understand
documentary as an evolving practice and to develop an artistic response when depicting our social
reality- from everyday experience to the events that shape the world. An important aspect of the class
will be examining the diversity of ways that journalists and artists have used the camera to extend and
question the power of photography as document. The class will address key questions of media and
mediation, the nature and status of documentary in the context of globalizing media and how
traditional documentary work has been affected by video, performance, conceptual art and activism.

Page 12 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
271. (FNAR571, VLST251) Introduction to Photography. (C) Prerequisite(s): None. Course Fee
$75.00
This course is an introduction to the basic processes and techniques of black & white photography.
Students will learn how to expose and process 35mm film, SLR camera operation, darkroom
procedures & printing, basic lighting and controlled applications. It begins with an emphasis on
understanding and mastering technical procedures and evolves into an investigation of the creative
and expressive possibilities of making images. This is a project-based course, where students will
begin to develop their personal vision, their understanding of aesthetic issues and photographic
history. Assignments, ideas and important examples of contemporary art will be presented via a series
of slide lectures, critiques and discussion. No previous experience necessary. 35mm SLR cameras will
be available throughout the semester for reservation and checkout from the photography equipment
room.
If you need assistance registering for a closed section, please email the department at
fnarug@design.upenn.edu
SM 272. (FNAR572) Advanced Photography: Integrated Techniques and Strategies. (C)
Prerequisite(s): FNAR 271 or Permission From Instructor. Course Fee $75.00
This studio course seeks to broaden each student's skills by experimenting with a wide range of
photographic media. Advanced analog, digital and experimental lens-based techniques will be
covered, as well as larger camera formats to expand their vocabulary as image-makers. Emphasis will
be on an integrated experience of the photographic medium and the development of a body of work
that is both theoretically and historically informed. The course will be a means to view and discuss
various strategies of important contemporary photographers. Focused assignments, readings, slide
lectures and gallery visits will supplement each student's artistic practice and research.
SM 274. (FNAR574) Reconfiguring Portraiture. (B) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 271 or FNAR 340 or
Permission of Instructor. Course Fee $75.00
As methods of representation are constantly shifting, one thing is clear - the photographic portrait is
not what is used to be. Exploring both traditional and contemporary methods of portraiture, this class
will uncover and discuss the ways in which we perceive each other in imagery, both as individuals and
as groups. Throughout the semester, we will consider how portraits deal with truth, physical absence,
the gaze, cultural embodiment, voyeurism and the digital persona. This course will build on the
combination of perception, technology, and practice. Throughout the semester, students will advance
by learning lighting techniques and strategies of presentation - as these core skills will become tools in
the execution of project concepts. In tandem with each project, students will encounter and discuss a
wide array of photography and writings from the past to the present, in an effort to understand the
meanings and psychological effects of freezing the human image in time.
279. (FNAR679) Studio Lighting. (B) Wahl.Prerequisite(s): FNAR 271 or Permission of Instructor.
Course Fee $75.00
The necessity of light and how light is rendered in relationship to what is seen and understood, is often
a key ingredient in the portrayal of a subject. The origin of the still life can be found in images as far
back as antiquity and has dealt with notions of death, science, class, social customs and even sex.
Photography picked up on the tradition in 1827 and has not only made use of the form, but has
expanded the topic into very unique territories. Contemporary artists have re-invented and reinvigorated the still life, formalism & abstract photography. As a framework for exploring 'hands-on'
lighting techniques, students will creatively grapple with the photography of objects in the studio.
Working with the physical, symbolic, and conceptual ramifications of depicting specific forms in an
image, teamed with the discussion of key texts, critiques, and studio lighting seminars, each student
will create a considered and unique portfolio of images.

Page 13 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
280. (FNAR580) Figure Drawing I. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 123. Course Fee $75.00
Students work directly from the nude model and focus on its articulation through an understanding of
anatomical structure and function. Students will investigate a broad variety of drawing techniques and
materials. The model will be used as the sole element in a composition and as a contextualized
element.
281. (FNAR581) Figure Drawing II. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 280. Course Fee $75.00
Figure Drawing II is an advanced class designed to further develop the student's skill and facility in
capturing the human form. Content and conceptual issues will be explored through individualized
projects concentrating on the figure. Students will also expand on their knowledge of drawing media
and application.
285. (FNAR685) Photography and Fiction. (B) Diamond.Prerequisite(s): FNAR 271 or FNAR 340 or
Permission from the Instructor.
In spite of photography's traditional relationship with fact, the medium has been a vehicle for fiction
since the very beginning. Fiction and photography encompass a broad range of meanings,from
elaborately staging and performing for the camera, to manipulations using digital technology such as
Photoshop to construct the work. This class will examine and trace the history of manipulated
photography while paying special attention to the complex negotiations between the decisive moment,
the constructed tableau, and the digitally manipulated image. There will be a combination of class
lectures, studio projects, assigned readings, visiting artists, film screenings, field trips, and class
critiques.
SM 282. (FNAR582) Advanced Topics in Photography: Site, Space and Documentation. (A)
Prerequisite(s): FNAR 271 or FNAR 340 or Permission from Instructor. Course Fee $75.00
This course will challenge students to create immersive environments and activated spaces through
interdisciplinary means. Students will be working on individual as well as collaborative projects; they
will be encouraged to incorporate different media with photography and explore the various methods
and materials of installation. They will learn how to develop and present professional proposals and
experiment with different modes of documentation. We will examine the history of Installation Art with
an emphasis on contemporary trends and important emerging artists. Topics of discussion will range
from site-specificity/architecture, Social Practice models and performance-oriented residue. The
course culminates with a public presentation-an exhibition of student projects created for specific sites
on campus.
284. (FNAR684) Photography and Fashion. Prerequisite(s): FNAR 271 or FNAR 340 or Permission
from Instructor. Course Fee $75.00
Since the invention of photography, the fashion industry has been one of the cornerstones of creative
expression, innovation and visionary provocation. Contemporary fashion photography has continued to
attract a leading group of image-makers that continue the tradition of creating artwork that not only is
being published in cutting edge magazines such as V, Another Magazine and Citizen K, but also are
exhibiting their work in various galleries and museums around the world. This course is designed for
students who are interested in creating contemporary fashion images through specific assignments
that define the process: lighting in studio or location, working with fashion designers, stylists, models,
hair/ make up artists, and the application of a variety of post production techniques, via Photoshop.
The class will explore modern constructs that define the importance of branding, marketing,
advertising and the relationship of fashion photography in contemporary art and culture today.

Page 14 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
286. (FNAR686) Visual Narrative. (A) Comberg and Diamond.
Visual Narrative is an introduction to the practice of storytelling with images. From news and
information to art, law, and science, visual storytelling is a critical aspect of creating and navigating
contemporary culture. This course is situated at the intersection of design, art, and visual culture,
focusing on relevant forms and topics including the photo essay, information design and visual
explanation, the photographic sequence in contemporary art, scenario design and concept
visualization.
Visual Narrative focuses on traditional as well as emerging modes of production and distribution for
documentary, visual storytelling, and photojournalism, exploring new aesthetics and the social impact
of visual narratives.
Visual Narrative immerses students in the study of narrative craft and creation of visual stories
covering topics relevant to designers and photographers. Beginning with the photo series and the
photo documentary tradition, the course evolves through multimedia narrative and non-narrative forms.
Students will explore principles of narrative construction in design and photography through lecture,
studio projects, and with presentations by visiting artists, designers, and photographers. Students will
work within and across disciplines of art, design, and visual journalism, exploring topics including
context, cause and effect, time, space, flow, picture-to-picture relationships, sequence, visual hierarchy,
and linearity. Study of non-narrative systems - categorical, rhetorical, abstract, and associational forms
- as well as interactive narratives will also be included.
289. (CINE289, FNAR589) Mixed Media Animation. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 123 and FNAR 264.
Course Fee $75.00
Mixed Media Animation is a contemporary survey of stop-motion animation concepts and techniques.
Students use digital SLR cameras, scanners and digital compositing software to produce works in
hand-drawn animation, puppet and clay animation, sand animation, and multiplane collage animation.
Screenings and discussions in the course introduce key historical examples of animation
demonstrating how these techniques have been used in meaningful ways. Students then learn how to
composite two or more of these methods with matte painting, computer animation or video.
SM 310. Critical Issues in Art. (B) Diamond.
Perspectives on Critical Issues aims to engage students in an ongoing and informed study of both
historical and contemporary issues in a spirit of curiosity and critique. We will investigate how these
concepts can clarify and complicate our creative practice and our understanding of the contemporary
art world. This seminar will explore the shifts in artistic production, theory and criticism and topics will
range from traditional investigations of aesthetics, Modernism, Post-Modernism and contemporary
themes.
Through discussions of assigned readings, class presentations, films, lectures, and field trips, this
seminar will help establish a critical and theoretical foundation where your own beliefs and doubts
about art and culture will be called into question and will provoke an ongoing inquiry into how you
understand art, you own creative process, and the relationship of art and artists to society and creative
culture.

Page 15 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
SM 330. (FNAR530) Making Space and Public Art. (A) Lum.
The French social philosopher Michel de Certeau upset the common understanding of the relationship
between space and place by elevating space as practice place. By this, he meant that place is but a
set of geo-physical particularities that has no dynamic meaning unless activated through social
engagement so that space is produced. Spatial practice is a key concept in the modern understanding
of the city as a society of abstract space, one in which the problem of human alienation is riven with
the logic of spatial spectacularization. Public Art is often employed to address or mollify such urban
problems through concepts of historical reconstruction or institutional critique, including possibly
testing the limits of public expression. Historical markers play a somewhat different role by calling
attention to lost or negative histories, albeit most often vetted through the language of tourism factoids.
This course will examine the discursive issues at play in respect to art and markers, particularly for
Philadelphia. Additionally, important public art works from around the world will be examined. The
course will also include the occasional visit of several key works downtown in which the question of
what can and cannot said will be pondered.
SM 315. (ENGL119, FNAR615) Across Forms: Art and Writing. (A) Hayes and Zolf.
What if a poem spoke from inside a photograph? What if a sculpture unfurled a political manifesto?
What if a story wasn't just like a dance, but was a dance-or a key component of a video, drawing,
performance, or painting? In this course, artists and writers will develop new works that integrate the
forms, materials, and concerns of both art and writing. Many artists employ writing in their practices,
but may not look at the texts they create as writing. And many writers have practices that go beyond
the page and deserve attention as art. This course will employ critique and workshop, pedagogic
methodologies from art and writing respectively, to support and interrogate cross- pollination between
writing and art practices. Additionally, the course will will examine a field of artists and writers who are
working with intersections between art and writing to create dynamic new ways of seeing, reading, and
experiencing.
SM 320. (ARTH301, CINE320, CINE393, ENGL291) Topics in Animation. (A) Staff.
This course will look at animation as an art form, a technology and an industry. We will explore the way
in which artistic, technical, historical, and cultural conditions shape the development of animation and
in turn, how animation impacts viewers. Topics will include trends in animation and their relation to
contemporary popular culture, issues of art versus commerce in the creation of cartoons, the
intersection of animation and politics, and shifts in style and technique throughout the years. We will
look at the figures who have shaped the art forms and continue to influence it, the rise in animation's
popularity, and current day applications of animate imagery.
SM 325. Drawing Seminar. (A) Matt Neff.Prerequisite(s): FNAR 123 or permission by instructor.
This seminar explores drawing practices as both a concrete and metaphorical, as space for
conversation and questioning, and as a way to expand the boundaries of drawing. Using readings,
films, class trips, independent research, and discussions, students will learn about themes in
contemporary art relating to drawing, and its historically close relationship with interdisciplinary studio
practices. Through studio-based projects, students will explore drawing's varied forms: perceptural,
digital, time-based, performative, schematic, sculptural, and interactive. These projects will build on
perceptual drawing skills and explore a wide use of traditional and non-traditional methods, tools, and
materials.

Page 16 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
331. (FNAR631) Interdisciplinary Studio: Sites of Convergence and Hybridity. (B)
Tileston.Prerequisite(s): One previous studio course (such as FNAR 123, FNAR145, FNAR150, FNAR
231 or FNAR 264) or permission from the instructor.
This course takes an experimental multimedia approach to investigating some of the boundaries in
contemporary art making practices. Painting, photography, video, design and sculpture intersect,
overlap, and converge in complicated ways. Projects will be designed to explore hybrid forms, collage,
space/ installation, and color through a variety of strategic and conceptual proposals as students work
towards unique ways of expanding their own work. Weekly readings, critiques, and presentations will
be integrated with studio projects. This studio/seminar is appropriate for students at all levels and from
all areas of Fine Arts and Design.
334. (FNAR534) Painting Studio. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 123 and FNAR 333.
Painting Studio IV focuses on continuing the student's exploration of techniques, problems, and poetics
of painting, the nuances of the painting language, and the development of a personal direction. While
students may choose to work on assigned projects (either in consultation with the instructoror following
the projects that the Painting II/III students may be involved in), the emphasis is on the investigation of
the student's own sensibility. Students will be expected to engage in ongoing critical analysis of their
own practices and assumptions.
337. (FNAR637) Information Design and Visualization. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 264. Course Fee
$75.00
Information Design and Visualization is an introductory course that explores the structures of
information (text, numbers, images, sounds, video, etc.) and presents strategies for designing effective
visual communication appropriate for various users and audiences. The course seeks to articulate a
vocabulary of information visualization and find new design forms for an increasingly complex culture.
347. (FNAR647) Expanded Documentary. (B) Davenport.Prerequisite(s): FNAR-061 or FNAR-271 or
FNAR-340 or permission from instructor. Course Fee $75.00
The sites and situations of documentary in our culture have exploded exponentially - from
standardized formulas (like reality tv), to social media and cross-platform journalism. In contemporary
art, documentary practice has also significantly expanded and diversified. Since the early 2000's, with
several influential exhibitions following Documenta XI, a new generation of artists have taken up the
ambition of depicting our social reality, and have done so by re-engaging and re-inventing the
documentary mode. This intermediate course will examine this vital contemporary field and will also
offer students a comprehensive introduction to the history of documentary practice. We will investigate
a series of key questions regarding the relation between politics and aesthetics, mediums and mobility,
how documents function to both approximate and deny a sense of 'reality' and perhaps most
importantly-what kinds of social, political or personal realities you want to propose in your artwork. The
class will be driven by a series of studio assignments and practical experimentation. Although there will
be an emphasis on photography and video, students will also explore a multiplicity of strategies and
forms (including archival display, essayistic installation, image-text relationships, and the
documentation of performance.)
SM 338. (FNAR638) Creative Research. (A) Telhan. Course Fee $75.00
This seminar explores what it means to do research in creative and critical practices. Students learn
about different research methods from design, engineering, humanities and sciences; utilize them for
developing and evaluating their individual creative work as cultural producers. This is an
interdisciplinary course that encourages students to observe, measure, analyze, test, study,
experiment, diagram, prototype, speculate, generate and criticize; apply multiple modes of inquiry; be
conceptual, analytical, propositional and critical at the same time to develop their work from different
perspectives.

Page 17 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
340. (FNAR640, VLST265) Digital Photography. (C) Course Fee $75.00
This class offers an in-depth technical and conceptual foundation in digital imagery and the opportunity
to explore the creative, expressive possibilities of photography. Students will become proficient with the
basic use of the camera, techniques of digital capture, color management and color correction. They
will also develop competency in scanning, retouching, printing and a variety of manipulation
techniques in Photoshop. Through weekly lectures and critiques, students will become familiar with
some of the most critical issues of representation, consider examples from photo history, analyze the
impact of new technologies and social media. With an emphasis on structured shooting assignments,
students are encouraged to experiment, expand their visual vocabulary while refining their technical
skills. No previous experience is necessary. Although it is beneficial for students to have their own
Digital SLR camera, registered students may reserve and checkout Digital SLR cameras and other
high-end equipment from the department.
If you need assistance registering for a closed section, please email the department at
fnarug@design.upenn.edu
SM 343. (FNAR643) Language of Design. (B)
The course will explore the changing relationship during the modern era between design(structure,
model, plan of a work of art) and language (metaphor for a system of communication; speech, writing,
literature). Our readings and visual presentations will focus on topics in the decorative arts, painting,
architecture, typography and visual communication. We will focus on primary sources in order to
situate our inquiry in a larger historical context. The discussion will center on claims about the inherent
meaning of form, discuss different roles for design -as an ideological statement, as an agent of social
change, and as an idiosyncratic expression. Topics will also include the search for a universal visual
language, attempts at bridging the perceived gap between spoken and written language, and the
impact of visual form on the meaning of literary texts (particularly when the author has been involved in
the publication process). Students can suggest additional topics related to their field of study.
348. (FNAR648) Counter the Land: Photography and the Landscape. (A) Wahl.Prerequisite(s):
FNAR 271 or FNAR 340 or with permission from the instructor.
Starting with the representaion of landscape in painting in the early 1800s, the course will then move
through Pictorialsim and the Modernist movement in photography. Revisiting the later half of the 20th
century, we will begin to consider the shifting practices of landscape and the ways it has been
photographically depicted up to the present. Collaborating with the Brandywine River Museum of Art in
Chadds Ford, students will begin their photographic exploration with the work of Andrea Wyeth and the
landscape of the Brandywine Valley. As we consider Wyeth, the imges of James Welling will aslo be
introduced. Credited for pioneering new forms of representation in photography in the 1970s, Welling
also revisited the work of Wyeth from 2010-2015, and committed to a fresh (and challenging) look at
tradition.
Working with imagery and text, this class will also touch on conceptual art, the New Topographics,
and postmodernism. Through these various concentrations, students will consider and counter the
traditions that they are already familiar with, while creating work based on issues of the landscape
today. Questions about meaning, politics, social critique, land rights, technology and methods of
presentaion will be encouraged and explored throughout the course.
349. (FNAR649) Advanced Digital Photography. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 340. Course Fee $75.00
In this studio course, students will become proficient in advanced techniques of image production
while expanding their artistic process and refining their photographic work. With an emphasis on selfdirected projects and research, students will further their knowledge of image control and
manipulation, retouching and collage, advanced color management; become familiar with high-end
equipment and develop professional printing skills. Class discussion, lectures and assigned readings
will address the critical issues in contemporary art, media and photographic culture. Emphasis will be
on integrating practice and critical dialogue.

Page 18 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
370. (FNAR670) Advanced Graphic Design and Typography. (A) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 266 and
FNAR 269 or Permission of Instructor. Course Fee $75.00
This course will explore advanced commercial, public and personal forms of visual communication.
Emphasis will be placed on creative problem solving with consideration for audience. Discussion of
design history, current ideology and future design applications will inform individual student projects.
Work generated in this studio can be used to build a portfolio.
350. (FNAR650) Shared Culture: New Strategies for Artists in the Digital Age. (B) Goldsmith. Fine
Arts Majors or MFA students ONLY or permission of instructor.
Our digital world has forced us to entirely rethink what it means to be an artist in the digital age,
socially, economically, and politically. Ideas that have long been stable - including originality, creativity,
and genius - are ripe for reexamination and redefinition in the twenty- first century. When the entire
internet is copy- and-pasteable - and distribution moves swiftly - is anything off limits for the artist? Can
we imagine our artistic production mimicking the meme, rippling through the networks for a day, then
disappearing forever? Are we doomed to make works that are supposed to live for eternity or, in the
face of environmental meltdown and collapsing financial markets, can we instead move our production
toward the ephemeral? What would this look like? Can our output be steered toward the political? Can
we frame these ideas as acts of resistance? Or compliance? Is there an inside? Is there an outside?
353. (CINE353, FNAR653) Advanced Projects in Animation. (B) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 235 and
FNAR 267, or Instructor Permission.
Students will explore facial animation at great depth. Investigating both skeletal and muscular anatomy,
students will implement their knowledge in the creation of facial rigs and realistic animation of 3D
computer characters. Strong emphasis will be placed on drawing and acting skills to achieve a
successful working knowledge of both form and function. As an advanced seminar course, students
are expected and encouraged to work and explore topics outside of the classroom.
366. (FNAR646) Advanced 3-D Modeling. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 235/365 or FNAR 236/536.
Course Fee $75.00
Advanced 3-D Modeling will give students the opportunity to refine skills in modeling, texturing, lighting
and rendering with an emphasis on the evolution of ideas through constant revision based on class
critique. Students will use a variety of industry standard software packages, including, but not limited to
Maya and Mudbox to compose complex environments. Projects are designed to give students the
opportunity to work with original content within a simulated production environment.
378. (FNAR678) Interfacing Cultures: Designing for Mobile, Web and Public Media. (B)
Prerequisite(s): FNAR 234. Course Fee $75.00
This course introduces advanced topics related to contemporary media technologies, ranging from
social media to mobile phones applications and urban interfaces. Students learn how to use new
methods from interaction design, service design, and social media and work towards prototyping their
ideas using new platforms and media. The class will cover a range of topics such as such as onlinegaming, viral communication, interface culture, networked environments, internet of things and discuss
their artistic, social, and cultural implications to the public domain.
399. Independent Study. (C) Prerequisite(s): See Department for section number. A minimum threepage proposal must be submitted and approved by both the Instructor and the Undergraduate Director.

Page 19 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
SM 488. Senior Seminar and Project (Fall Semester). (A) Prerequisite(s): Fine Arts Majors in Senior
Year only.
This rigorous pair of courses, one offered in the Fall and one offered in the Spring semester, are
designed as the capstone of the Fine Arts major and are required for all graduating fine arts seniors.
They can only be taken in the senior year. Students work in individual studio spaces provided by the
department and then meet with faculty for seminar, critique, and professional practice exercises.
Through individual and group critiques, students begin to conceptualize thier final thesis exhibition or
project. The senior seminar allows students to create lasting professional relationships with the fine
arts faculty and visiting lecturers. The fall semester culminates in a group exhibition of senior student
work paired with final semester critiques.
SM 489. Senior Seminar Project. (B) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 488; Fine Arts Majors in Senior Year only.
The Spring semester seminar culminates in a senior thesis exhibition for each graduating student.
These exhibitions have traditionally been held as a small group exhibition featuring a few students in
one group, or as a larger end of semester exhibition with each student installing a series of works. The
format of the exhibition will be determined during the fall semester by the senior faculty. The process of
preparing, installing, and promoting the thesis exhibition is covered in detail throughout the semester.
Students will work in their on-campus studio spaces to produce dynamic, thoughtful and well-crafted
work that will serve as their final portfolio. They will present their portfolio of work during a final critique
before graduation.
501. Graduate Studio I. (A) Lum/Freedman/Mosley/Telhan/Tileston.
First year studio for MFA students' core pursuit of self-directed interdisciplinary problems that
contribute to one or more of the visual arts disciplines.
502. Graduate Studio II. (B) Adkins/Davenport/Freedman/Mosley/Telhan/Tileston.
Second year studio for MFA students' core pursuit of self-directed interdisciplinary problems that
contribute to one or more of the visual art disciplines.
526. (FNAR126) Sequential Drawing. (B) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 523.
Sequential drawing instructs in the visualization of story telling through the exploration of visual
narrative components (visual iconography, panel- to-panel transition types, picture/word relations) and
their application to a narrative through the use of formal drawing techniques (composition, color,
perspective, line, form). The class begins with various exercises in paneling, pacing and style
development, and concludes with the student applying the concepts and techniques they've acquired
to the creation of a graphic novel.
515. Photography Studio Abroad. (K) Prerequisite(s): Permission of Instructor Required Competitive Application Process Only.
This Traveling Studio is offered every other spring term to upper level photography & related media
students. It is a cross-cultural visual investigation, exploring the contradictions and significance of the
chosen city. This course incorporates multi-disciplinary research in preparation for the trip; exploring
various fields of knowledge production such as art, history, social sciences, markets and governance.
Class discussion, readings and individual research will be focused towards the development of each
student's photo/media project, which will be realized while abroad. After returning to Philadelphia,
students will develop and refine their work; the remaining classes will emphasize critique, editing,
printing and presentation options. The final projects will be included in a group exhibition at the end of
the semester. Admission to the course is on a competitive basis.

Page 20 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
523. (FNAR123, VLST253) Drawing I. (C)
This course is designed to develop visual awareness and perceptual acuity through the process of
drawing. Students learn to sharpen perceptual skills through observational drawing, and to explore the
expressive potential of drawing. A variety of problems and media will be presented in order to
familiarize students with various methods of working and ways of communicating ideas visually.
Subject matter will include object study, still life, interior and exterior space, self-portrait and the figure.
Different techniques and materials (charcoal, graphite, ink, collage) are explored in order to
understand the relationship between means, material and concept. Critical thinking skills are
developed through frequent class critiques and through the presentation of and research into historical
and contemporary precedent in drawing.
If you need assistance registering for a closed section, please email the department at
fnarug@design.upenn.edu
524. (FNAR124) Drawing Investigations. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 523.
Drawing is a fundamental means of visualization and a hub for thinking, constructing, and engaging in
a wide variety of creative activities and problemsolving. This studio class explores drawing in both its
traditional and contemporary forms. The projects are designed to help students in all disciplines find
ways express and clarify their ideas through the process of drawing. The semester begins with the
refinement of perceptual skills acquired in Drawing I, while encouraging experimentation through the
introduction of color, abstract agendas, conceptual problem solving, and collaborative exercises, as
well as new materials, techniques and large format drawings. Particular attention is given to ways to
conduct visual research in the development of personal imagery. Assignments are thematic or
conceptually based with ample opportunity for individual approaches to media, subject, scale and
process. The goal is to stregnthen facility, develop clarity in intent and expand expression. Attention is
paid to the development of perceptual sensitivity, methods of imagage construction, and the processes
of synthesis and transformation in order tocommunicate ideas through visual means. Recommended
for students in all areas.
SM 530. (FNAR330) Making Space and Public Art. (A) Lum.
The French social philosopher Michel de Certeau upset the common understanding of the relationship
between space and place by elevating space as practice place. By this, he meant that place is but a
set of geo-physical particularities that has no dynamic meaning unless activated through social
engagement so that space is produced. Spatial practice is a key concept in the modern understanding
of the city as a society of abstract space, one in which the problem of human alienation is riven with
the logic of spatial spectacularization. Public Art is often employed to address or mollify such urban
problems through concepts of historical reconstruction or institutional critique, including possibly
testing the limits of public expression. Historical markers play a somewhat different role by calling
attention to lost or negative histories, albeit most often vetted through the language of tourism factoids.
This course will examine the discursive issues at play in respect to art and markers, particularly for
Philadelphia. Additionally, important public art works from around the world will be examined. The
course will also include the occasional visit of several key works downtown in which the question of
what can and cannot said will be pondered.

Page 21 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
531. (FNAR231) Painting Practices. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 523.
Painting practices is an introduction to the methods and materials of oil painting. This course begins
with an investigation of color and color relationships. The beginning of the semester will cover technical
issues and develop the student's ability to create a convincing sense of form in space using mass,
color, light and composition. The majority of work is from direct observation including object study, still
life, landscape, interior and exterior space and the self portrait. Class problems advance sequentially
with attention paid to perceptual clarity, the selection and development of imagery, the process of
synthesis and translation, color, structure and composition, content and personal expression. Students
will become familiar with contemporary and art historical precedent in order to familiarize them with the
history of visual ideas and find appropriate solutions to their painting problems.
SM 538. (FNAR238) Open Book. (A) Course Fee $75.00
"Open Book" will focus on visual communication of information. It will address two methods of inquiry
and the corresponding means of visual representation: the objective, well structured research of facts
and images, and the creative process of their subjective evaluation and restatement. Students will
propose a topic based on their area of interest and engage in a focused, semester-long exploration,
which they will present in the form of a designed and printed book.
532. (FNAR232) Painting Studio. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 531. This course can be continued by
registering for FNAR 533 Painting Studio (III), and FNAR 534 Painting Studio (IV).
Painting Studio presents an ongoing exploration of the techniques, problems and poetics of painting,
the nuances of the painting language, and the development of a personal direction. A wide variety of
problems will address such issues as color, composition, and the development of imagery, process,
and content. Students are expected to improve in technical handling of paints and move towards
developing personal modes of seeing, interpreting, and thinking for themselves. This course introduces
different topics, strategies and individual challenges each semester, so it may be repeated with
advanced course numbers.
534. (FNAR334) Painting Studio. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 523 and FNAR 533.
Painting Studio IV focuses on continuing the student's exploration of techniques, problems, and poetics
of painting, the nuances of the painting language, and the development of a personal direction. While
students may choose to work on assigned projects (either in consultation with the instructoror following
the projects that the Painting II/III students may be involved in), the emphasis is on the investigation of
the student's own sensibility. Students will be expected to engage in ongoing critical analysis of their
own practices and assumptions.
536. (FNAR236) Digital Figure Modeling. (B) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 635; Recommended FNAR 543
or FNAR 580. Course Fee $75.00
This course introduces methods of modeling, texturing, and rendering human and animal figures.
Students will study anatomical bone and muscle structures, and then employ this knowledge as they
develop polygonal models for real-time 3D simulations or gaming environments, high-resolution
renderings, and rapid prototyping.

Page 22 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
541. (FNAR241) Hand-Drawn Computer Animation. (M) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 636. Course Fee
$75.00
Using software tools designed for hand-drawn animation, students will develop animation skills
applicable to all forms of animation. In this course students will learn to draw with a sense of urgency
and purpose as they represent motion and drama in a series of frames. Through careful study of
natural movements, precedents in the history of animation, and through the completion of a series of
animation projects students will develop strategies for representing naturalistic movement, inventing
meaningful transformations of form, and storytelling.
542. (FNAR142) 3-D Design. (C)
Students will make work that draws from and interacts with the three-dimensional world we live in.
Formal strategies will explore principles of organization. Planar construction. modeling and
assemblage methods will be used for investigations spanning from bas-relief to environmental art. This
is a "learn by doing" process with no prerequisites.
543. (FNAR243) Figure Sculpture I. (C) Course Fee $75.00
An introduction of modeling the human figure in clay. Students will work from the live model,
acquainting themselves with issues of basic anatomy, form and function, and clay modeling. No
previous experience is required; drawing experience a plus.
545. (FNAR145, VLST252) Sculpture Practices. (C)
As an introduction to traditional and contemporary three-dimensional practice, this course is concerned
with the concepts and methodologies surrounding three-dimensional art making in our time. Students
experiment with a variety of modes of production, and develop some of the fundamental techniques
used in sculpture. In addition to these investigations, assignments relative to the history and social
impact of these practices are reinforced through readings and group discussion. Processes covered
include use of the Fab Lab, wood construction, clay, paper, mixed media, and more.
If you need assistance registering for a closed section, please email the department at
fnarug@design.upenn.edu
547. (FNAR247) Environmental Animation. (B) Landau.Prerequisite(s): Experience in landscape
architecture, architecture, animation, programming, film, Photoshop, or graphic design is strongly
encouraged but not required.
This studio-based course examines the disciplinary spaces of landscape, art, and architecture through
the medium of 3D animation and storytelling. We immerse ourselves in environments that may be as
small as a cell or as large as a planet. From the refiguring of images, models, graphic design, or video
to visualization or coding the genesis of whole environments, this course will allow for a variety of entry
point for students of different disciplines and skill levels. Projects will range in scope from animated
GIFs to animated shorts.
This course embraces a spirit of invention, collaborative learning, and interdisciplinary crosspollination. Experience in landscape architecture, architecture, animation, programming, film, GIS, and/
or graphic design is encouraged. We will examine and discuss some standard typologies such as the
walk-through, data-visualization, as well as filmic and avant garde strategies as starting points for
creative reinterpretation of space. We will primarily be using 3D Studio Max and After Effects with
support from Next Engine 3D Scanner, Rhino, and Grasshopper. Scripting will be included in most
assignments to enhance artistic control of the software.

Page 23 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
553. (FNAR253) Advanced Projects in Printmaking. (B) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 551 and FNAR 552
or FNAR 557. Course Fee $75.00
This course will concentrate on expanding imagery in print media. The course requires the proposal of
a directed final project to be developed during the semester. Three initial exploratory projects will
culminate in the final. Projects are open to all print media, but there will be an emphasis on screen
printing. Techniques will be addressed as they serve the needs of ideas rather than a set technical
procedure. Through individual consultation, scheduled class critiques, and field trips, attention will be
given to studio work in and out of printmaking so that the technical and conceptual strengths of print
media can serve as a worthwhile adjunct to an overall studio practice.
550. (FNAR250, VLST250) Introduction to Printmaking. (B) Course Fee $75.00
The course offers an introduction to several forms of printmaking including: intaglio, screen printing,
relief, and monoprinting. Through in-class demonstrations students are introduced to various
approaches to making and printing in each medium. The course enhances a student's capacity for
developing images through two-dimensional design and conceptual processes. Technical and
conceptual skills are developed through discussions and critiques.
551. (FNAR251) Printmaking: Etching. (C) Course Fee $75.00
The class will challenge the possibilities of experimental drawing and ways of creating incisions and
textures using copper plates as the matrix, which then will be printed on paper and other materials.
The class offers full technical and historical description of each individual process: Dry Point, Etching,
Hard ground, Soft Ground, Aquatint, Shine Cole', Spit-Biting, Sugar Lift, Color Printing and Viscosity
printing.
552. (FNAR252) Printmaking: Relief & Screen Printing. (C) Course Fee $75.00
This course is an introduction to technical skills and investigative processes in screen printing and
relief and examines methods for combining digital technology with traditional print media. The course
introduces students to several contemporary applications of silkscreen and relief printmaking including
techniques in multi-color printing, photo-based silkscreening, digital printing, woodcut, linocut, and
letterpress. Demonstrations include photo and image manipulation, color separating and output
techniques, hand carving and printing, as well as drawing and collage. Both traditional and
experimental approaches are explored and encouraged and technical and conceptual skills are
developed through discussions and critiques.
554. Graduate Printmaking I. (G) Adkins. Course Fee $75.00
This course will cover the traditional print processes while offering a chance to develop visual skills.
The processes covered in class will include momoprinting (one of a kind prints), relief printing and a
variety of etching techniques. Demonstrations will be offered to introduce more advanced processes
like lithography and silkscreening. This class is an excellent introduction to the visual arts because the
though process as well as the development of the image can be recorded. $40 Studio Fee.

Page 24 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
557. (FNAR257) Printmaking: Mixed Media. (C) Course Fee $75.00
This course will explore the interplay of analog and digital processes and products of printing through
various media, technology and conceptual approaches. In this changing world of communication,
explore the intersection of old and new media to fabricate new and experimental design for print media.
Using the printshop, the computer, and the equipment in the fabrication lab as our interface for
exploration, we will focus on text and image relationships by integrating design, typography, print, and
digital systems in a printing workshop environment. This course begins with an exploration of
processes and experimentation, resulting in the creation of an edition that is conceptually centered on
individual interests that engage the senses, the imagination, and the intellect.
558. (FNAR258) Introduction to Clay: the Potter's Wheel and Beyond. (C) FNAR Faculty. Course
Fee $75.00
In this introductory clay class, students will learn all the fundamental skills needed to create threedimensional forms in clay using a variety of methods: wheel throwing, handbuilding (such as coil
building and slab construction), and press molding. Whether creating utilitarian forms or creating
sculpture, projects are designed to strengthen both craftsmanship and individual creativity. In addition
to developing a working knowledge of the ceramic process, including surface treatments and glazing,
students will also be introduced to design issues as well as contemporary art/ceramics topics that
influence our aesthetic sensibilities. No prerequisites.
559. (FNAR259) Beginning Clay: Handbuilding and Casting Techniques. (C) FNAR Faculty. Course
Fee $75.00
Modeling and casting are fundamental methods of object-making. Students will learn basic
handbuilding techniques such as coil building, slab construction, and mold making through
assignments that incorporate conceptual and technical issues. Through experimentation with these
methods, this course promotes an understanding of materials, processes, visual concepts, and
techniques for creating three-dimensional forms in space. In addition to using different water-based
clays and plaster, other materials such as wax, plastiline, paper pulp, cardboard, and tar paper will be
explored. No prerequisites.
563. (FNAR263) Advanced Wheel Studio. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 561. Course Fee $75.00
This course teaches students more advanced wheel throwing techniques while helping to develop their
critical skills in other areas of ceramic work. Students will learn to throw, employing larger masses of
clay, and to increase the complexity of their work by combining and altering thrown parts. There will be
an emphasis on experimentation in surface treatment and design, the goal of which is to expand a
student's ability to create more complicated and personalized clay works. In addition to learning the
technical knowledge, there will be critical discussions of contemporary ceramics issues through image
presentations, reading materials and field trips.
569. (FNAR269) Typography. (B) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 636. Course Fee $75.00
The study and practice of typography spans the history of individual letterforms through the typesetting
of full texts. It is a complete immersion into type as an integral part of visual communication.
Typesetting conventions and variables including legibility, readability, texture, color and hierarchy will
be stressed, as well as a form for organizing information and expressing visual ideas. Studio work will
include collecting and analyzing type, designing an original typeface, researching type history and
experimenting with typographic forms.

Page 25 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
566. (FNAR266) Graphic Design with Creative Technologies. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 636.
Course Fee $75.00
The aim of this course is to introduce students creative ways to use color, typography, and layout
across new materials and media, ranging from print to physical objects. Students will explore visual
design through a set of assignments and projects that are geared towards exploring the role of design
in visual arts, interaction design, media design and architecture. The course introduces a number of
design concepts such as content organization, navigation, interaction and data-driven design and
show ways to develop new design metaphors, presentation techniques, and imagery using old and
new technologies. course is structured as a combination of lectures and hands on workshops where
students will have the chance to work both individually and collaboratively to realize their projects.
567. (FNAR267) Computer Animation. (C) Course Fee $75.00
Through a series of studio projects this course introduces techniques of 2D and 3D computer
animation. Emphasis is placed on time-based design and storytelling through animation performance
and montage. Students will develop new sensitivities to movement, composition, cinematography,
editing, sound, color and lighting.
568. (FNAR268, IPD 568) Interactive Design Studio: Biological Design. (C) Course Fee $75.00
This course is a research-based design studio that introduces new materials, fabrication, and
prototyping techniques to develop a series of design proposals in response to the theme: Biological
Design. The studio introduces life sciences and biotechnologies to designers, artists, and nonspecialists to develop creative and critical propositions that address the social, cultural, and
environmental needs of the 21st century. The course will be a pilot study of the first biodesign
challenge organized by CUT/PASTE/GROW. The final projects will be submitted to a competition and
the winning entry will be featured at Biofabricate in Summer 2017.
570. (FNAR270) Graphic Design Practicum. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 566 or FNAR 569. Course
Fee $75.00
Practicum provides a real world experience for students interested in solving design problems for nonprofit and community organizations. The studio works with two clients each semester, and previous
projects have included print design, web design, interpretive signage and exhibit interactives. All
projects are real and will result in a portfolio-ready finished product. Students will participate in a full
design experience including design, client interaction, presentations, production, and project
management. In addition, students will take field trips, meet professionals and go on studio visits.
571. (FNAR271, VLST251) Introduction to Photography. (C) Course Fee $75.00
This course is an introduction to the basic processes and techniques of black & white photography.
Students will learn how to expose and process 35mm film, SLR camera operation, darkroom
procedures & printing, basic lighting and controlled applications. It begins with an emphasis on
understanding and mastering technical procedures and evolves into an investigation of the creative
and expressive possibilities of making images. This is a project-based course, where students will
begin to develop their personal vision, their understanding of aesthetic issues and photographic
history. Assignments, ideas and important examples of contemporary art will be presented via a series
of slide lectures, critiques and discussion. No previous experience necessary. 35mm SLR cameras will
be available throughout the semester for reservation and checkout from the photography equipment
room.
If you need assistance registering for a closed section, please email the department at
fnarug@design.upenn.edu

Page 26 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
SM 572. (FNAR272) Advanced Photography: Integrated Techniques and Strategies. (C)
Prerequisite(s): FNAR 571 or Permission of Instructor. Course Fee $75.00
This studio course seeks to broaden each student's skills by experimenting with a wide range of
photographic media. Advanced analog, digital and experimental lens-based techniques will be
covered, as well as larger camera formats to expand their vocabulary as image-makers. Emphasis will
be on an integrated experience of the photographic medium and the development of a body of work
that is both theoretically and historically informed. The course will be a means to view and discuss
various strategies of important contemporary photographers. Focused assignments, readings, slide
lectures and gallery visits will supplement each student's artistic practice and research.
SM 574. (FNAR274) Reconfiguring Portraiture. (B) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 571 or FNAR 640 or
Instructor Permission. Course Fee $75.00
As methods of representation are constantly shifting, one thing is clear - the photographic portrait is
not what is used to be. Exploring both traditional and contemporary methods of portraiture, this class
will uncover and discuss the ways in which we perceive each other in imagery, both as individuals and
as groups. Throughout the semester, we will consider how portraits deal with truth, physical absence,
the gaze, cultural embodiment, voyeurism and the digital persona. This course will build on the
combination of perception, technology, and practice. Throughout the semester, students will advance
by learning lighting techniques and strategies of presentation - as these core skills will become tools in
the execution of project concepts. In tandem with each project, students will encounter and discuss a
wide array of photography and writings from the past to the present, in an effort to understand the
meanings and psychological effects of freezing the human image in time
SM 576. Critical Issues Seminar. (C) Tileston.
This seminar investigates issues concerning visual artists. Part one begins with Plato and Kant and
progresses through a history of ideas in art, exploring the questions which concern artists today,
including Modernism, post-modernism, abstraction and representation, appropriation, context, art and
politics, identity, and the artist's relationship to these subjects. Part two of the course will focus on
current texts in contemporary art, the current dialogue(s), and issues specific to our time and place as
artists. The seminar engages contemporary issues in a spirit of curiosity and critique, and relates them
to our studio practice.
SM 575. Graduate Drawing Seminar. (B) Tileston/Freedman.
This seminar examines the essential nature drawing has in an artist's process. Direct visual
perception, self-referential mark making, the viability of space and understanding it, and drawing from
one's own work are some of the drawing experiences encountered in the course. There are regular
critiques and discussions based on the work and readings.
SM 578. (FNAR278) Documentary Strategies. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 571 or FNAR 640 or
Permission from Instructor. Course Fee $75.00
This course offers a context for photographers to develop a documentary project - either within a
traditional photojournalistic framework or one that challenges these traditions. The aim is to understand
documentary as an evolving practice and to develop an artistic response when depicting our social
reality- from everyday experience to the events that shape the world. An important aspect of the class
will be examining the diversity of ways that journalists and artists have used the camera to extend and
question the power of photography as document. The class will address key questions of media and
mediation, the nature and status of documentary in the context of globalizing media and how
traditional documentary work has been affected by video, performance, conceptual art and activism.

Page 27 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
580. (FNAR280) Figure Drawing I. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 523. Course Fee $75.00
Students work directly from the nude model and focus on its articulation through an understanding of
anatomical structure and function. Students will investigate a broad variety of drawing techniques and
materials. The model will be used as the sole element in a composition and as a contextualized
element.
581. (FNAR281) Figure Drawing II. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 580. Course Fee $75.00
Figure Drawing II is an advanced class designed to further develop the student's skill and facility in
capturing the human form. Content and conceptual issues will be explored through individualized
projects concentrating on the figure. Students will also expand on their knowledge of drawing media
and application.
SM 582. (FNAR282) Advanced Topics in Photography: Site, Space and Documentation. (A)
Prerequisite(s): FNAR 571 or FNAR 640 or Permission from Instructor. Course Fee $75.00
This course will challenge students to create immersive environments and activated spaces through
interdisciplinary means. Students will be working on individual as well as collaborative projects; they
will be encouraged to incorporate different media with photography and explore the various methods
and materials of installation. They will learn how to develop and present professional proposals and
experiment with different modes of documentation. We will examine the history of Installation Art with
an emphasis on contemporary trends and important emerging artists. Topics of discussion will range
from site-specificity/architecture, Social Practice models and performance-oriented residue. The
course culminates with a public presentation-an exhibition of student projects created for specific sites
on campus.
585. (FNAR085) Performance Studio. (B) Hayes.Prerequisite(s): One previous studio course (such
as FNAR523, FNAR545, FNAR640, OR FNAR661) or permission from the instructor. Course Fee
$75.00
This course supports the individual and collaborative production of performance works. As the medium
of performance consists of diverse forms, actions, activities, practices and methodologies, the course
allows for an open exploration in terms of material and form. Students are invited to utilize
technologies, materials and methodologies from other mediums and/or disciplines such as video,
photography, writing and sound. In addition to the production component, the course will examine
multiple histories of performance through readings, screenings and directed research.
589. (CINE289, FNAR289) Mixed Media Animation. (B) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 523 and FNAR 636.
Course Fee $75.00
Mixed Media Animation is a contemporary survey of stop-motion animation concepts and techniques.
Students use digital SLR cameras, scanners and digital compositing software to produce works in
hand-drawn animation, puppet and clay animation, sand animation, and multiplane collage animation.
Screenings and discussions in the course introduce key historical examples of animation
demonstrating how these techniques have been used in meaningful ways. Students then learn how to
composite two or more of these methods with matte painting, computer animation or video.

Page 28 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
SM 591. The Body and Photography. (B) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 271 or FNAR 340 and Instructor
Permission Required. Course Fee $75.00
The last few decades have introduced dramatic changes in the way we interact with each other, the
way we communicate, the way we date, watch porn, etc. Ethical concerns have arisen with scientific
advances such as stem cell research, fertility drugs, Botox, cloning and erectile dysfunction. This
studio course will investigate the myriad ways in which the corporeal is addressed and manipulated in
contemporary art, science, religion, pop culture and media. Students will develop photographic
projects related to updated questions concerning gender, sexuality and social issues. Lectures,
readings and class discussion will focus and inform their individual work.
601. Graduate Studio III. (A) Lum/Freedman/Mosley/Telhan/Tileston.
First year studio for MFA students' core pursuit of self-directed interdisciplinary problems that
contribute to one or more of the visual art disciplines.
SM 594. Graduate Photography Seminar. Davenport.
This seminar will examine contemporary issues in photography from the point of view of the practicing
artist. Students will meet with visiting critics during the semester, the course will also include student
presentations, weekly discussions and group critiques, visits to artists' studios and gallery and
museum exhibitions. Texts for the seminar will be drawn from contemporary critical theory in art,
philosophy, history and popular culture. Required for all graduate photographers.
SM 598. Grad Sculpture Seminar. (B) Staff.
Sculpture instructor (to be announced) will lead this studio course based on improvisational
approaches to developing individually made sculptural works, as well as works that are made in
collaboration with others. As in Music or Theater, these works involve the collaboration of others, yet
they are equally initiated by small thoughts, and carry those thoughts into a more public and interactive
format of installation.
602. Graduate Studio IV. (B) Adkins/Davenport/Freedman/Mosley/Telhan/Tileston.
Second year studio for MFA students' core pursuit of self-directed interdisciplinary problems that
contribute to one or more of the visual art disciplines.
SM 615. (ENGL119, FNAR315) Across Forms: Art and Writing. (A) Hayes and Zolf.
What if a poem spoke from inside a photograph? What if a sculpture unfurled a political manifesto?
What if a story wasn't just like a dance, but was a dance-or a key component of a video, drawing,
performance, or painting? In this course, artists and writers will develop new works that integrate the
forms, materials, and concerns of both art and writing. Many artists employ writing in their practices,
but may not look at the texts they create as writing. And many writers have practices that go beyond
the page and deserve attention as art. This course will employ critique and workshop, pedagogic
methodologies from art and writing respectively, to support and interrogate cross- pollination between
writing and art practices. Additionally, the course will will examine a field of artists and writers who are
working with intersections between art and writing to create dynamic new ways of seeing, reading, and
experiencing.

Page 29 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
620. (FNAR220) Producing Ephemera: Letterpress, Risopgraph, Inkjet, Xerox. (A) Romberger.
This studio course introduces students to the world of printmaking and circulation through techniques
in letterpress and Risograph (a high-speed digital printing system developed in Japan in the 1980s), in
addition to Xerox, laser, inkjet, and off-set printing, focusing particularly on the format of prints, artists'
ephemera, and the role of ephemera in understanding culture. Studnets will create their own
broadsides, flyers, announcement cards, and independent publications throughout the course,
exploring ways in which artists, designers, musicians, and activists make or have made use of the print
to disseminate information; initiate happenings; advertise events; or format change. Studnets will learn
about some of the most significant producers working within this realm - from Conceptualists to punk
bands - and develop skills in page layout, typography, and design; mechanized and hand-pulled press
operations; and digital to analog pre-press and post-print production methods.
This course is designed for highly motivated students and requires out-of-class time commitment.
However, no prior coursework is required. Students from all levels and backgrounds are encourged to
register. The course employs combined collaborative / self-directed approaches to learning to enhance
students' understandings of ways in which print media and multiples serve as vital conduits for
disseminating ideas involving visual art, popular culture, literature, politics, performance and many
other topics students will wish to explore.
SM 622. (FNAR222, URBS322) The Big Picture: Mural Arts in Philadelphia. (C)
The history and practice of the contemporary mural movement couples step by step analysis of the
process of designing with painting a mural. In addition students will learn to see mural art as a tool for
social change. This course combines theory with practice. Students will design and paint a large
outdoor mural in West Philadelphia in collaboration with Philadelphia high school students and
community groups. The class is co-taught by Jane Golden, director of the Mural Arts Program in
Philadelphia, and Shira Walinsky, a mural arts painter and founder of Southeast by Southeast project,
a community center for Burmese refugees in South Philadelphia.
631. (FNAR331) Interdisciplinary Studio: Sites of Convergence and Hybridity. (B)
Tileston.Prerequisite(s): One previous studio course (such as FNAR 523, FNAR545, FNAR640, FNAR
531 or FNAR 636 or Penn Design course) or permission from the instructor.
This course takes an experimental multimedia approach to investigating some of the boundaries in
contemporary art making practices. Painting, photography, video, design and sculpture intersect,
overlap, and converge in complicated ways. Projects will be designed to explore hybrid forms, collage,
space/ installation, and color through a variety of strategic and conceptual proposals as students work
towards unique ways of expanding their own work. Weekly readings, critiques, and presentations will
be integrated with studio projects. This studio/seminar is appropriate for students at all levels and from
all areas of Fine Arts and Design.
636. (FNAR264, VLST264) Art, Design and Digital Culture. (C) Course Fee $75.00
This course is an introduction to the fundamental perception, representation, aesthetics, and design
that shape today's visual culture. It addresses the way artists and designers create images; design with
analog and digital tools; communicate, exchange, and express meaning over broad range of media;
and find their voices within the fabric of contemporary art, design, and visual culture. Emphasis is
placed on building an extended form of visual literacy by studying and making images using a variety
of representation techniques; learning to organize and structure two-dimensional and threedimensional space, and designing with time-based and procedural media. Students learn to develop
an individual style of idea-generation, experimentation, iteration, and critique as part of their creative
and critical responses to visual culture.
If you need assistance registering for a closed section, please email the department at
fnarug@design.upenn.edu

Page 30 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
633. (FNAR233) Digital Illustration. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 636 and FNAR 523. Course Fee
$75.00
Digital Illustration is a course designed to expose students to the diverse techniques and approaches
used in creating digital illustration for print publication. Course assignments will include twodimensional animation storyboard rendering, figure illustration, technical diagram illustration,
photographic retouching and enhancing. Digital applications will include morphing with layers, surface
cloning, three-dimensional modeling and spatial transformation of scenes and objects. Students
completing this course will possess the capability to design and plan creatively and skillfully execute
finished artwork.
634. (FNAR234) Art of the Web: Interactive Concepts for Art & Design. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR
636. Course Fee $75.00
Art of the Web: Interactive concepts for art and design is a first step in learning how tocreate, analyze
and discuss interactive content, as a visual creator. It is an exploration of the culture of the internet, the
ideas behind its quirks, the dreams and freedoms it encapsulates, and the creative power it gives to us.
Students will be assigned projects that will challenge their current understanding of the web, and the
ways it shapes human connectivity and interaction. Upon completion of this course, students will
possess a working knowledge how to organize and design websites and learn to critique web-content
including navigation, UX design and information ? architecture. The course will require analytical and
conceptual skills and foster creative thinking.
635. (FNAR235) 3-D Computer Modeling. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 523 and FNAR 636. Course Fee
$75.00
Students will develop a comprehensive knowledge of how virtual worlds are constructed using
contemporary computer graphics technique with a fine arts perspective. The course will offer the
opportunity to explore the construction, texturing, and rendering of forms, environments, and
mechanisms while conforming to modeling specifications required for animation, real-time simulations
or gaming environments, and rapid prototyping.
637. (FNAR337) Information Design and Visualization. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 636. Course Fee
$75.00
Information design and visualization is an introductory course that explores the structure of information
(text, numbers, images, sounds, video, etc.) and presents strategies for designing effectivevisual
communication appropriate for various users and audiences. The course seeks to articulate a
vocabulary of information visualization and find new design forms for an increasingly complex culture.
SM 638. (FNAR338) Creative Research. (A) Telhan. Course Fee $75.00
This seminar explores what it means to do research in creative and critical practices. Students learn
about different research methods from design, engineering, humanities and sciences; utilize them for
developing and evaluating their individual creative work as cultural producers. This is an
interdisciplinary course that encourages students to observe, measure, analyze, test, study,
experiment, diagram, prototype, speculate, generate and criticize; apply multiple modes of inquiry; be
conceptual, analytical, propositional and critical at the same time to develop their work from different
perspectives.

Page 31 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
640. (FNAR340, VLST265) Digital Photography. (C) Course Fee $75.00
This class offers an in-depth technical and conceptual foundation in digital imagery and the opportunity
to explore the creative, expressive possibilities of photography. Students will become proficient with the
basic use of the camera, techniques of digital capture, color management and color correction. They
will also develop competency in scanning, retouching, printing and a variety of manipulation
techniques in Photoshop. Through weekly lectures and critiques, students will become familiar with
some of the most critical issues of representation, consider examples from photo history, analyze the
impact of new technologies and social media. With an emphasis on structured shooting assignments,
students are encouraged to experiment, expand their visual vocabulary while refining their technical
skills. No previous experience is necessary. Although it is beneficial for students to have their own
Digital SLR camera, registered students may reserve and checkout Digital SLR cameras and other
high-end equipment from the department.
If you need assistance registering for a closed section, please email the department at
fnarug@design.upenn.edu
647. (FNAR347) Expanded Documentary. (B) Davenport.Prerequisite(s): FNAR-571 or FNAR-640 or
FNAR-661 or permission from instructor. Course Fee $75.00
The sites and situations of documentary in our culture have exploded exponentially - from
standardized formulas (like reality tv), to social media and cross-platform journalism. In contemporary
art, documentary practice has also significantly expanded and diversified. Since the early 2000's, with
several influential exhibitions following Documenta XI, a new generation of artists have taken up the
ambition of depicting our social reality, and have done so by re-engaging and re-inventing the
documentary mode. This intermediate course will examine this vital contemporary field and will also
offer students a comprehensive introduction to the history of documentary practice. We will investigate
a series of key questions regarding the relation between politics and aesthetics, mediums and mobility,
how documents function to both approximate and deny a sense of 'reality' and perhaps most
importantly-what kinds of social, political or personal realities you want to propose in your artwork. The
class will be driven by a series of studio assignments and practical experimentation. Although there will
be an emphasis on photography and video, students will also explore a multiplicity of strategies and
forms (including archival display, essayistic installation, image-text relationships, and the
documentation of performance.)
SM 643. (FNAR343) LANGUAGE OF DESIGN. (B)
The course will explore the changing relationship during the modern era between design(structure,
model, plan of a work of art) and language (metaphor for a system of communication; speech, writing,
literature). Our readings and visual presentations will focus on topics in the decorative arts, painting,
architecture, typography and visual communication. We will focus on primary sources in order to
situate our inquiry in a larger historical context. The discussion will center on claims about the inherent
meaning of form, discuss different roles for design -as an ideological statement, as an agent of social
change, and as an idiosyncratic expression. Topics will also include the search for a universal visual
language, attempts at bridging the perceived gap between spoken and written language, and the
impact of visual form on the meaning of literary texts (particularly when the author has been involved in
the publication process). Students can suggest additional topics related to their field of study.

Page 32 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
645. (FNAR245) Book and Publication Design. (A) Hyland.Prerequisite(s): FNAR 636 is strongly
suggested but not required.
Book and Publication Design will focus on the theory and professional practice of designing multi-page
publications. Students will analyze formal structures of different types of books-literature and poetry,
fiction and non-fiction compilations, illustrated volumes such as art catalogues, monographs and
textbooks, and serial editions-discussing both traditional and experimental approaches. The format of
the course will be split between theoretical and historical evaluations of book formats by drawing on
the Van Pelt Rare Book Collection-and studio time where students will design books with attention to
the format's conceptual relationship to the material at hand with a focus on typography and page
layout, as well as on understanding production methods of printing and binding. In addition to the
conventions of page layout students will examine paratextual elements (title page, practices of
pagination and other internal structuring, content lists and indexes, colophons, notes and marginalia,
end-leaves, binding, etc.).
646. (FNAR366) ADVANCED 3D MODELING. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 235/635 or FNAR 236/536.
Course Fee $75.00
648. (FNAR348) Counter the Land: Photography and the Landscape. (A) Wahl.Prerequisite(s):
FNAR 571 or FNAR 640 or with permission of the instructor.
Starting with the representaion of landscape in painting in the early 1800s, the course will then move
through Pictorialsim and the Modernist movement in photography. Revisiting the later half of the 20th
century, we will begin to consider the shifting practices of landscape and the ways it has been
photographically depicted up to the present. Collaborating with the Brandywine River Museum of Art in
Chadds Ford, students will begin their photographic exploration with the work of Andrea Wyeth and the
landscape of the Brandywine Valley. As we consider Wyeth, the imges of James Welling will aslo be
introduced. Credited for pioneering new forms of representation in photography in the 1970s, Welling
also revisited the work of Wyeth from 2010-2015, and committed to a fresh (and challenging) look at
tradition.
Working with imagery and text, this class will also touch on conceptual art, the New Topographics,
and postmodernism. Through these various concentrations, students will consider and counter the
traditions that they are already familiar with, while creating work based on issues of the landscape
today. Questions about meaning, politics, social critique, land rights, technology and methods of
presentaion will be encouraged and explored throughout the course.
649. (FNAR349) Advanced Digital Photography. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 640. Course Fee $75.00
In this studio course, students will become proficient in advanced techniques of image production
while expanding their artistic process and refining their photographic work. With an emphasis on selfdirected projects and research, students will further their knowledge of image control and
manipulation, retouching and collage, advanced color management; become familiar with high-end
equipment and develop professional printing skills. Class discussion, lectures and assigned readings
will address the critical issues in contemporary art, media and photographic culture. Emphasis will be
on integrating practice and critical dialogue.

Page 33 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
654. (FNAR254) Printmaking & Publications: Intro to Independent Publishing and Artists'
Publications. (A) Romberger.
This course introduces students to independent publishing and artists' publications through print
methods in letterpress, Risograph, and Xerox. The class will focus on the self-published artists' zine/
book as an affordable, accessible, and easily reproducible format for exploring ideas, disseminating
artists' work, and collaborating across disciplines. Students will learn a range of skills, including
techniques in both mechanized and hand-pulled forms of printed media (Risograph, copy machine,
Vandercook letterpress); short- run editions and binding; design and layout; pre-press and print
production; and the web as it relates to and supports independent and democratic modes of
distribution. Students will learn about and become acquainted with some of the most significant
independent publishers working today and throughout history. Students will leave class having
completed three individual projects: a 16-page booklet/zine; a carefully considered online publication,
and a final collaborative book designed, developed and published as a class. The course commences
with a field trip to New York City's Printed Matter, one of the oldest and most important nonprofit
facilities dedicated to the promotion of artists' books, where students will be encouraged to submit a
publication by semester's end.
650. (FNAR350) Shared Culture: New Strategies for Artists in the Digital Age. (B) Goldsmith. Fine
Arts Majors or MFA students ONLY or permission of instructor.
Our digital world has forced us to entirely rethink what it means to be an artist in the digital age,
socially, economically, and politically. Ideas that have long been stable - including originality, creativity,
and genius - are ripe for reexamination and redefinition in the twenty- first century. When the entire
internet is copy- and-pasteable - and distribution moves swiftly - is anything off limits for the artist? Can
we imagine our artistic production mimicking the meme, rippling through the networks for a day, then
disappearing forever? Are we doomed to make works that are supposed to live for eternity or, in the
face of environmental meltdown and collapsing financial markets, can we instead move our production
toward the ephemeral? What would this look like? Can our output be steered toward the political? Can
we frame these ideas as acts of resistance? Or compliance? Is there an inside? Is there an outside?
SM 661. (CINE061, FNAR061, VLST261) Video I. (C) Course Fee $75.00
In this studio based course, students are introduced to video production and postproduction as well as
to selected historical and theoretical texts addressing the medium of video. Students will be taught
basic camera operation, sound recording and lighting, as well as basic video and sound editing and
exporting using various screening and installation formats. In addition to a range of short assignmentbased exercises, students will be expected to complete three short projects over the course of the
semester. Critiques of these projects are crucial to the course as students are expected to speak at
length about the formal, technical, critical and historical dimensions of their works. Weekly readings in
philosophy, critical theory, artist statements and literature are assinged. The coruse will also include
weekly screenings of films and videos, introducing students to the history of video art as well as to
other contemporary practices.
If you need assistance registering for a closed section, please email the department at
fnarug@design.upenn.edu
SM 662. (FNAR062) Video II. (C) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 661. Course Fee $75.00
Video II offers opportunities to further explore the role of cinematic narrative technique, non-narrative
forms, digital video cinematography, editing, and screen aesthetics. Through a series of several video
projects and a variety of technical exercises, students will refine their ability to articulate technically
and conceptually complex creative projects in digital cinema. In addition, one presentation on a
contemporary issue related to the application of cinematic storytelling and/or the cultural context of
digital video is required.

Page 34 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
SM 663. (FNAR063) Documentary Video. (A) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 661. Course Fee $75.00
Documentary Video is an intensive production course involving the exploration of concepts,
techniques, concerns, and aesthetics of the short form documentary. Building on camera, sound, and
editing skills acquired in Video I, students will produce a portfolio of short videos and one longer
project over the course of the semester using advanced level camera and sound equipment. One short
presentation on a genre, technique, maker, or contemporary concern selected by the student is
required.
SM 665. (FNAR065) Cinema Production. (A) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 661. Course Fee $75.00
This course focuses on the practices and theory of producing narrative based cinema. Members of the
course will become the film crew and produce a short digital film. Workshops on producing, directing,
lighting, camera, sound and editing will build skills necessary for the hands-on production shoots.
Visiting lecturers will critically discuss the individual roles of production in the context of the history of
film.
SM 667. (CINE067, FNAR067) Advanced Video Projects. (M) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 662.
This course is structured to create a focused environment and support for individual inquiries and
projects. Students will present and discuss their work in one on one meetings with the instructor and in
group critiques. Readings, screenings, and technical demonstrations will vary depending on students'
past history as well as technical, theoretical, and aesthetic interests. Course approval will be based on
application prior to the beginning of the semester.
SM 671. (FNAR070) Film Sound: History, Aesthetics and Subversion. (A) Novack. Course Fee
$75.00
Sound and Image as experienced in the cinema, are not divisible. One perception influences the other,
and transforms it. While a preexisting harmony between these two senses may exist, its conventions
are subject to manipulation and the whims of subversion. Film Sound tracks the technological and
aesthetic history of sound for film including psychoacoustics, dialogue, music, sound fx and audio's
gradual and triumphant march towards fidelity, stereo and surround sound. This lecture course,
through an historical and pedagogical romp loaded with examples throughout film history and visits by
lauded audio professionals from the film world, seeks to instruct students to engage in the process of
sound perception, gaining an appreciation for the art of sound as it relates to the varied
phenomenological dimensions of that unique audio-visual encounter we call movies.
SM 668. (CINE068, FNAR068) Cinematography. (B) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 661.
This course will be a technical, practical and aethetic exploration of the art of cinematography as it
pertains to film and digital video. Through screenings, in-class excercises and assignments, students
will increase their Video I skills in lighting and cinematography as a form of visual expression. Topics
covered include shot composition, camera movement, lenses, filtration and color, exposure, lighting
techniques, location shooting and how to use grip equipment. Discussions, demos and lectures will
include relevant and illustrative historical motion picture photography, current digital video technology,
and examples that explore interactions between film and video.
669. Graduate Video Studio. (A) Mosley.
Through a series of studio projects, this course focuses on the conceptualization and production of
time-based works of art. A seminar component of the course reviews contemporary examples of media
based art and film. A studio component of the course introduces production techniques including
lighting, cinematography, audio, editing, mastering projects, and installing audio-visual works in sitespecific locations or gallery spaces.

Page 35 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
670. (FNAR370) Advanced Graphic Design and Typography. (A) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 566 AND
FNAR 569 or Permission of Instructor. Course Fee $75.00
This course will explore advanced commercial, public and personal forms of visual communication.
Emphasis will be placed on creative problem solving with consideration for audience. Discussion of
design history, current ideology and future design applications will inform individual student projects.
Work generated in this studio can be used to build a portfolio.
673. (FNAR073) Machine for Seeing: Architecture and the Moving Image. (B) Hartt.Prerequisite(s):
FNAR 661. Course Fee $75.00
Architecture's relationship with cinema was established with the very first motion picture. In Sortie de
l'usine Lumiere de Lyon by Auguste and Louis Lumiere we see a didactic presentation of film titles as
workers from the Lumiere brother's factory stream forth from its interior at days end. In many ways the
context of the film is its subject as well. The title of the class plays on Le Corbusier's maxim that
architecture is machine for living and perhaps cinema is simply a machine for helping us understand
the vast construct of our built environment. A device, which allows us to imagine even greater follies or
more importantly to think critically about architecture's relationship with and impact on society.
Readings, screenings, discussions and critiques make up the curriculum along with studio time.
Students will produce their own film and we will look at films produced by a range of practioners: From
architects speculating on the nature of and use of public space and urban development to
documentarians researching the pathologies of neo-liberalism and its effect on the privatization of
space. We will also look at the work of artists who engage with the poetics of space and who unpack
the conflicted legacies of the built environment.
674. (FNAR074) A Virus in the Culture: Social Critique in Media Arts. (A) David Hartt and Mark
Owens.Prerequisite(s): FNAR 661 or permission from instructor.
In order to change the world, we must first learn how to infect it. A Virus in the Culture is a studio class
that examines and generates various forms of media resistance to dominant hegemonic systems of
power and control. Using filmmaking, publication design and interactive media we'll think through and
develop responses to some of the most pressing issues facing us today. We'll look at historical models
from the agitprop design work of Gee Vaucher for Anarcho-punk band Crass to Chris Marker's film Le
Fond de L'Air Est Rouge, a radical analysis of global social and political turmoil in the late 60s and
early 70s. We'll also look at experimental contemporary design firms like Metahaven who question the
role of designers and filmmakers today - Bypassing the power dynamics of clients and briefs they took
it upon themselves to create a graphic identity for WikiLeaks. Each example broadens the definition
and possibilities of practice to create a more porous engagement with audiences and users while
informing the practice of social critique today. Considering a diverse range of topics from education
policy, to the rights of environmental refugees, we'll use the class to workshop a singular
comprehensive project that targets researches and responds to a specific contested position. The
outcome of which will be a class produced short film,
publication and website that unpacks the social, cultural, and economic complexities of our subject.
This class is co-taught by David Hartt, an artist and filmmaker along with graphic designer, Mark
Owens. Reading, screenings, discussions and critiques make up the curriculum along with studio time.
While the focus of this course is not technical, prior knowledge of design programs, camera functions,
and post-production techniques is expected.

Page 36 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
684. (FNAR284) PHOTOGRAPHY & FASHION. Prerequisite(s): FNAR 571 or FNAR 640 or
Permission from Instructor. Course Fee $75.00
Since the invention of photography, the fashion industry has been one of the cornerstones of creative
expression, innovation and visionary provocation. Contemporary fashion photography has continued to
attract a leading group of image-makers that continue the tradition of creating artwork that not only is
being published in cutting edge magazines such as V, Another Magazine and Citizen K, but also are
exhibiting their work in various galleries and museums around the world. This course is designed for
students who are interested in creating contemporary fashion images through specific assignments
that define the process: lighting in studio or location, working with fashion designers, stylists, models,
hair/ make up artists, and the application of a variety of post production techniques, via Photoshop.
The class will explore modern constructs that define the importance of branding, marketing,
advertising and the relationship of fashion photography in contemporary art and culture today.
SM 675. (CINE075, FNAR075) Image and Sound Editing. (B) Prerequisite(s): FNAR 661. Course
Fee $75.00
This course presents an in-depth look at the storytelling power of image and sound in both narrative
and documentary motion pictures. Students apply a theoretical framework in ongoing workshops,
exploring practical approaches to picture editing and sound design. Students edit scenes with a variety
of aesthetic approaches, and create story-driven soundtracks with the use of sound FX, dialogue
replacement, foleys, music and mixing. Students not only learn critical skills that expand creative
possibilities, but also broaden their understanding of the critical relationship between image and
sound.
678. (FNAR378) Interfacing Culture: Designing for Mobile, Web and Public Media. (B) Prerequisite
(s): FNAR 634. Course Fee $75.00
This course introduces advanced topics related to contemporary media technologies, ranging from
social media to mobile phones applications and urban interfaces. Students learn how to use new
methods from interaction design, service design, and social media and work towards prototyping their
ideas using new platforms and media. The class will cover a range of topics such as such as onlinegaming, viral communication, interface culture, networked environments, internet of things and discuss
their artistic, social, and cultural implications to the public domain.
679. (FNAR279) Studio Lighting. (B) Wahl.Prerequisite(s): FNAR 571 or Permission of Instructor.
Course Fee $75.00
The necessity of light and how light is rendered in relationship to what is seen and understood, is often
a key ingredient in the portrayal of a subject. The origin of the still life can be found in images as far
back as antiquity and has dealt with notions of death, science, class, social customs and even sex.
Photography picked up on the tradition in 1827 and has not only made use of the form, but has
expanded the topic into very unique territories. Contemporary artists have re-invented and reinvigorated the still life, formalism & abstract photography. As a framework for exploring 'hands-on'
lighting techniques, students will creatively grapple with the photography of objects in the studio.
Working with the physical, symbolic, and conceptual ramifications of depicting specific forms in an
image, teamed with the discussion of key texts, critiques, and studio lighting seminars, each student
will create a considered and unique portfolio of images.

Page 37 of 38

FINE ARTS
(FA) {FNAR}
685. (FNAR285) Photograhy and Fiction. (B) Diamond.Prerequisite(s): FNAR 271 or FNAR 640 or
Permission of the Instructor.
In spite of photography's traditional relationship with fact, the medium has been a vehicle for fiction
since the very beginning. Fiction and photography encompass a broad range of meanings,from
elaborately staging and performing for the camera, to manipulations using digital technology such as
Photoshop to construct the work. This class will examine and trace the history of manipulated
photography while paying special attention to the complex negotiations between the decisive moment,
the constructed tableau, and the digitally manipulated image. There will be a combination of class
lectures, studio projects, assigned readings, visiting artists, film screenings, field trips, and class
critiques.
686. (FNAR286) Visual Narrative. (A) Comberg and Diamond.
Visual Narrative is an introduction to the practice of storytelling with images. From news and
information to art, law, and science, visual storytelling is a critical aspect of creating and navigating
contemporary culture. This course is situated at the intersection of design, art, and visual culture,
focusing on relevant forms and topics including the photo essay, information design and visual
explanation, the photographic sequence in contemporary art, scenario design and concept
visualization. It proposes that studying and making sequential images and visual essays in a wide
range of media - comics and graphic novels, propaganda, environments and installations, social
media, animation, video, and digital media-are critical to understanding culture. The course immerses
students in the study of narrative craft and creation of visual stories covering topics relevant to
designers and photographers. Beginning with the photo series and the photo documentary tradition,
the course evolves through multimedia narrative and non-narrative forms. Students will explore
principles of narrative construction in design and photography through lecture, studio projects, and with
presentations by visiting artists, designers, and photographers.
SM 712. Visual Epistemologies for Creative Practices. (B) Furjan/Telhan.
In this joint seminar between Architecture and Fine Arts, we investigate the alternative modes of
diagrammatic thinking that are influencing art and design disciplines. The course provides a historical
perspective on the evolution of visual epistemologies from late 1950s and reviews its current state from
the lens of contemporary representation theory, computation, fabrication and information technologies.
The goal is to gain both theoretical and hands-on experience with the contemporary diagramming
techniques in order to advance both designs and the thinking behind them.
999. Independent Study. Staff.Prerequisite(s): See Graduate Progam Coordinator for section
numbers. Hours and credits arranged

Page 38 of 38

