FOLKLORE
(AS) {FOLK}
022. (AFRC050, AFST050, ANTH022, MUSC050) World Music and Cultures. (A) Arts & Letters
Sector. All Classes. Muller.
This course examines how we as consumers in the "Western" world engage with musical difference
largely through the products of the global entertainment industry. We examine music cultures in
contact in a variety of ways-- particularly as traditions in transformation. Students gain an
understanding of traditional music as live, meaningful person-to-person music making, by examining
the music in its original site of production, and then considering its transformation once it is removed,
and recontextualized in a variety of ways. The purpose of the course is to enable students to become
informed and critical consumers of "World Music" by telling a series of stories about particular
recordings made with, or using the music of, peoples culturally and geographically distant from the US.
Students come to understand that not all music downloads containing music from unfamiliar places
are the same, and that particular recordings may be embedded in intriguing and controversial
narratives of production and consumption. At the very least, students should emerge from the class
with a clear understanding that the production, distribution, and consumption of world music is rarely a
neutral process.
SM 025. (HIST025, RELS116, STSC028) Western Science, Magic and Religion 1600 to the
present. (C) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Kuklick.
Throughout human history, the relationships of science and religion, as well as of science and magic,
have been complex and often surprising. This course will cover topics ranging from the links between
magic and science in the seventeenth century to contemporary anti-science movements.
029. (GSWS109, RELS005) Women and Religion. (C) Humanities & Social Science Sector. Class of
2010 & beyond. Staff.
Introduction to the role of women in major religious traditions, focusing on the relationship between
religion and culture. Attention to views of women i sacred texts, and to recent feminist responses.
SM 082. (GSWS082) Ritual In American Life. (M) Paxton. Freshman Seminar
Starting with birth and working chronologically through a series of case studies, this course invites
students to examine the centrality of rituals that celebrate the human lifecycle as well as overtly
competitve sporting an political rituals. We will explore rituals that unfold at the local level a well as
those that most Americans experience only via the media. Rituals under examination include birthday
parties, Bat Mitzvahs, Halloween, Quinceaneras, Proms, graduations, rodeos, Homecomings,
weddings, Greek initiations, beauty pageants, reunions, and funerals. Students will be encouraged to
critically examine their own ritual beliefs and practices and consider these and other theoretical
questions: What is the status of ritual in post-industrial culture? What distinguishes popular culture
from officia ritual and secular from religious ritual? How do sociological variables suc as race, class,
gender, sexuality, and religion shape people's understanding of, and participation in, modern family
life? How do contemporary rituals bond Americans at the local and/or national level? All students will
be expected to conduct original research on a ritual of their own.
103. (COML103, HIST093, THAR103) Performing History. (M) St. George.
From medieval processions to the Mummer's Parade, from military reenactments to Mardi Gras,
communities do more than "write" or "read" history in order to feel its power and shape their futures.
Drawing upon traditions in theater, spectacle, religion, and marketing, they also perform their history-by replaying particular characters, restaging pivotal events and sometimes even changing their
outcomes--in order to test its relevance to contemporary life and to both mark and contest ritual points
in the annual cycle. This course will explore diverse ways of "performing history" in different cultures,
including royal passages, civic parades, historical reenactments, community festivals, and film.

Page 1 of 14

FOLKLORE
(AS) {FOLK}
106. (AFRC147, ANTH156, MUSC235) Studies in African-American Music. (C) Ramsey.
This course explores aspects of the origins, style development, aesthetic philosophies, historiography,
and contemporary conventions of African-American musical traditions. Beginning with the African
legacy, we situate the conceptual approaches of African American music within the larger African
Diaspora. The course provides a foundation for the advanced study of the various strains of black
musics to appear in the United States. Covering the 19th and 20th centuries, we explore the sociopolitical contexts and cultural imperatives of black music from a multidisciplinary perspective
(musicology, ethnomusicology, linguistics, African-American literary criticism, cultural studies, history,
anthropology). The range of genres, styles, idioms, and time periods include: the music of West and
Central Africa, the music of colonial America, 19th century church and dance music, minstrelsy, music
of the Harlem Renaissance, jazz, blues, gospel, hip-hop, and film music. Special attention is given to
the ways in which black music generates "meaning" and to how the social energy circulating within
black music articulates myriad issues about American identity at specific historical moments.
L/R 137. (SOCI137) Sociology of Media and Popular Culture. (C) Society Sector. All classes.
Grazian. Also fulfills General Requirement in Arts & Letters for Class of 2009 and prior
This course relies on a variety of sociological approaches to media and popular, with a particular
emphasis on the importance of the organization of the culture industries, the relationship between
cultural consumption and status, and the social significance of leisure activities from sports to
shopping. Specific course topics include the branding of Disney, Nike and Starbucks; the glovalization
of popular culture; the blurring of entertainment and politics; and the rise of new media technologies in
the digital age.
158. (AFRC158, LALS158, MUSC158) Musics of Latin America, the Caribbean, and Hispanics in
the U.S.. (M) Rommen.
This survey course considers Latin American musics within a broad cultural and historical framework.
Latin American musical practices are explored by illustrating the many ways that aesthetics, ritual,
communication, religion, and social structure are embodied in and contested through performance.
These initial inquiries open onto an investigation of a range of theoretical concepts that become
particularly pertinent in Latin American contextsK-concepts such as post-colonialism, migration,
ethnicity, and globalization. Throughout the course, we will listen to many different styles and
repertories of music and then work to understand them not only in relation to the readings that frame
our discussions but also in relation to our own, North American contexts of music consumption and
production.
200. (CLST100, CLST200, COML200) Greek and Roman Mythology. (C) Arts & Letters Sector. All
Classes. Struck.
Myths are traditional stories that have endured many years. Some of them have to do with events of
great importance, such as the founding of a nation. Others tell the stories of great heroes and heroines
and their exploits and courage in the face of adversity. Still others are simple tales about otherwise
unremarkable people who get into trouble or do some great deed. What are we to make of all these
tales, and why do people seem to like to hear them? This course will focus on the myths of ancient
Greece and Rome, as well as a few contemporary American ones, as a way of exploring the nature of
myth and the function it plays for individuals, societies, and nations. We will also pay some attention to
the way the Greeks and Romans themselves understood their own myths. Are myths subtle codes that
contain some universal truth? Are they a window on the deep recesses of a particular culture? Are
they entertaining stories that people like to tell over and over? Are they a set of blinders that all of us
wear, though we do not realize it? Investigate these questions through a variety of topics creation of
the universe between gods and mortals, religion and family, sex,love, madness, and death.

Page 2 of 14

FOLKLORE
(AS) {FOLK}
201. (ANTH205, RELS205) American Folklore. (C) Staff.
This course will examine American expressive culture, including everyday speech, narrative, music,
foodways, religion, public celebrations, and material culture through an exploration of the multiple and
changing avenues of diversity in the United States. Folklore can be considered the unofficial culture
that exists beneath and between the institutions of power that we read about in our history books, and
that is what we will be studying--the 99% of American life that goes unseen and unnoticed in other
college courses. Some of the topics we will examine are: campus folklore; body art and adornment;
contemporary (urban) legends and beliefs; public celebrations and rituals; and the adaptation and
commodification of folk culture in popular media.
203. (AFRC203, AFST213) Afro-American Folklore. (C) Staff.
An overview of the major forms of expressive culture developed by Afro-Americans. The course
focuses on the continuous development of black cultural expression from slavery to the present,
emphasizing the socio-historical context in which they are to be understood and interpreted.
223. (RELS213) Folk Religion. (M) Staff.
This course will emphasize religion as it is believed, practiced, and experienced in everyday life.
Emphasis will be placed on Christian belief systems in Europe and America in historical and
contemporary perspective. Among the topics to be discussed in 2005 will be stigmata, healing
miracles of the saints, apparitions of the Virgin Mary, possession, exorcism, the near-death
experience,the Rapture, Vodou, and contemporary Witchcraft.
229. (ANTH226, COML357, NELC249) Myth in Society. (C) Ben-Amos.
In this course we will explore the mythologies of selected peoples in the Ancient Near East, Africa,
Asia, and Native North and South America and examine how the gods function in the life and belief of
each society. The study of mythological texts will be accompanied, as much as possible, by illustrative
slides that will show the images of these deities in art and ritual.
231. American Popular Culture. (M) Lee.
The course will explore the history and practice of popular culture and culture studies in the United
States. We will begin by challenging the concepts of "folk," "mass" and "popular" as well as "American"
and "culture." Furthermore, we will interrogate various media such as television, film, music, comics
and popular romances to gain insights into the conditions for the reproduction of social relations.
Through an analysis of audience response to performed or viewed events we will explore how and why
people actively negotiate and interpret popular materials. This class will attempt to situate popular
culture within a larger social, cultural and political framework. Some areas of popular culture we may
investigate include MTV, talk shows, fashion, club cultures, rap and other musics, snaps, pro-wrestling,
professional sports, Hollywood movies, advertising, McDonald's and there will be room to explore
other areas students may find interesting. We will end by looking into the exportation of American
popular culture and its reception, interpretation, adaptation and consumption around the world.

Page 3 of 14

FOLKLORE
(AS) {FOLK}
SM 252. (NELC252) Themes in Jewish Tradition. (C) Staff.
Course topics will vary; they have included The Binding of Isaac, Responses to Catastrophes in
Jewish History, Holy Men & Women (Ben-Amos); Rewriting the Bible (Dohrmann); Performing Judaism
(Fishman); Jewish Political Thought (Fishman); Jewish Esotericism (Lorberbaum) Democratic culture
assumes the democracy of knowledge - the accessibility of of knowledge and its transparency. Should
this always be the case? What of harmful knowledge? When are secrets necessary? In traditional
Jewish thought, approaching the divine has often assumed an aura of danger. Theological knowledge
was thought of as restricted. This seminar will explore the "open" and "closed" in theological
knowledge, as presented in central texts of the rabbinic tradition: the Mishnah, Maimonides and the
Kabbalah. Primary sources will be available in both Hebrew and English.
233. (AFST233) African Folklore. (M) Staff.
"Despite the overwhelming reality of economic decline; despite unimaginable poverty; despite wars,
malnutrition, disease and political instability, African cultural productivity grows apace: popular
literatures, oral narrative and poetry, dance, drama, and visual art all thrive."-- Kwame Anthony Appiah
from In My Father's House
What role(s) does folklore play in the lives of Africans today? How has folklore adapted to the
realities of contemporary, urban Africa? This course will investigate the continuation of traditional
elements produced in diverse media and circumstances in a modern, largely urban, Africa. Although
traditional African culture has been transformed and changed in the face of rapid urbanization and
modernity, it continues to provide a means through which people enjoy themselves and comment on a
wide range of issues affecting their lives. Issues such as identity, difference, and diversity; tradition and
history; modernity and development; wealth and power; politics and political change; and gender
relations.
SM 240. (COML240, ENGL290) Fairy Tales. (M) Staff.
This course surveys the fairy tale (M rchen) as an oral narrative genre, and in its transformations as
literature, sequential art, and film. Topics include classic and contemporary collections from Europe,
the United States, and beyoond;issues of "authenticity" and the ownership of tales; fairy tales as folk
performance, post-modern pastiche, and material culture; and the genre's relationship to geography,
gender, power, and desire. This course will serve as a scholarly introduction to the field of Fairy-Tale
Studies. And it may examine works from Matthew Bright, Angela Carter, Emma Donoghue, Guillermo
Del Toro, Neil Gaiman, David Kaplan, and Bill Willingham.
241. (COML193, ENGL099) Great Story Collections. (M) Arts & Letters Sector. All Classes. Azzolina.
This course is intended for those with no prior background in folklore or knowledge of various cultures.
Texts range in age from the first century to the twentieth, and geographically from the Middle East to
Europe to the United States. Each collection displays various techniques of collecting folk materials
and making them concerete. Each in its own way also raises different issues of genre, legitimacy,
canon formation, cultural values and context.

Page 4 of 14

FOLKLORE
(AS) {FOLK}
259. (AFRC258, ANTH227, LALS258, MUSC258) Caribbean Music & Diaspora. (M) Rommen.
This survey course considers Caribbean musics within a broad and historical framework. Caribbean
musical practices are explored by illustrating the many ways that aesthetics, ritual, communication,
religion, and social structure are embodied in and contested through performance. These initial
inquiries open onto an investigation of a range of theoretical concepts that become particularly
pertinent in Caribbean contexts <-concepts such as post-colonialism, migration, ethnicity, hybridity,
syncretism, and globalization. Each of these concepts, moreover, will be explored with a view toward
understanding its connections to the central analytical paradigm of the course <- diaspora. Throughout
the course, we will listen to many different styles and repertories of music, ranging from calypso to
junkanoo, from rumba to merengue, and from dancehall to zouk. We will then work to understand them
not only in relation to the readings that frame our discussions but also in relations to our own NorthAmerican contexts of music consuption and production.
270. (GSWS270) Folklore and Sexuality. (M) Azzolina.
Sexuality is usually thought of as being biological or social, divided into categories of natural and
unnatural. Often misssed are its creative and communicative aspects. Examining the constructed
social elements of sexuality requires attention be paid to folklore in groups, between individuals and on
the larger platform of popular technological media. The most interesting locations for exploration are
those places where borderlands or margins, occur between genders, orientations and other cultural
categories. A field-based paper will be required that must include documentary research.
280. (COML283, JWST260, NELC258, RELS221) Jewish Folklore. (C) Ben-Amos.
The Jews are among the few nations and ethnic groups whose oral tradition occurs in literary and
religious texts dating back more than two thousand years. This tradition changed and diversified over
the years in terms of the migrations of Jews into different countries and the historical, social, and
cultural changes that these countries underwent. The course attempts to captur the historical and
ethnic diversity of Jewish folklore in a variety of oral literary forms. A basic book of Hasidic legends
from the 18th century will serve as a key text to explore problems in Jewish folklore relating to both
earlier and later periods.
299. Independent Study. (C) Staff.
Directed study at the sophomore level.
SM 310. (AFRC308, RELS310, URBS310) Religious Diversity in America: West Philadelphia. (M)
Matter.
In the 1950's America seemed to be a land of "Protestant, Catholic, and Jew." Now it is clearly also a
land of Muslims and Hindus, Buddhists and Taoists, Rastafarians and Neo-pagans and many more
religious groups. This course will focus upon a variety of topics: religious diversity in West Philadelphia,
Philadelphia and beyond; the politics of religious diversity; religion in American schools and cities; and
conflicts and cooperation among diverse religious groups.
SM 369. (HSOC369, STSC359) Introduction Complementary and Alternative Medicine. (A) Staff.
This course will present the study of health traditions in the field of folklore and folklife. It is designed to
explore the value of this approach to disciplines and individuals as they simultaneously bear upon all
human experience with, communication about, and understanding of illness, disease and healing.

Page 5 of 14

FOLKLORE
(AS) {FOLK}
SM 321. (ANTH321, ASAM321, URBS327) Exploring Local Memory and Tradition. (M) Hufford M..
In this place-based community serivce learning course, we explore the use of traditional verbal arts
material practices among immigrant communities seeking to make Philadelphia home. We begin with
theories of culture, community, identity, and the production of locality from the social science, and
move from there into historic, literary, and ethnographic portrayals of relevance tothe community we
will be working with. Students are introduced to the principles of ethnographic fieldwork, including
techniques of participant observation, interviewing, community-based research design, interpretation,
and presentation, and the ethical dimensions of fieldwork. Applying these methods, students develop a
project that serves the needs of a collaborating Philadephia community. Students gain critical thinking
and oberservation skills from the readings, discussion, writing assignments, and field trips. The
fieldwork component for the Spring 2007 focuses on the verbal arts and material cultural traditions of
South Philadelpia's Indonesian community. In partnersip with the Folk Arts and Cultural Treasures
School (FACTS),students and faculty will develop an overview of Philadelpia's Indonesian community
and its goals for cultural and lingustic maintenance. Students will also work with community members
to identify resources on which FACTS can draw in order
to support these goals for the many Indonesian children who have recently enrolled in the school.
This one and a half credit course, which fulfils the General Disribution requirement in Society, will be of
special value to students interested in anthropology, sociology, folklore and urban studies, linguistics,
asian studies, liteerary studies and vernacular arts and culture.
323. (HIST323) Material Life in America, 1600-1800. (C) St. George.
This course will explore the history of America's use and fascination with material goods between
1600 and 1860. We will examine such issues as the transferal of European traditions of material
culture to the New World, the creationof American creolized forms, the impact of reformers in the late
eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, and the development of regional landscapes. Thematic
issues will include consumerism, objects as symbolic communication and metaphor, and the
complementary issues of archaeology and history of art in material culture study.
360. (ANTH360, COML362, RELS316) Native American Folklore. (C) J.Berman.
A survey of the indigenous oral literaturres of North America that will read Native American myths and
other traditional narratives with the primary aim to exploring their meanings to Native people. Topics
will include, among other things, moral and religious significance, performance, aesthetics, humor, and
the relationship of myth to landscape and individual life experience. The course will also place the
study of Native American folklore in the context of the history of scholarship, and current issues such
as cultural renewal, language endangerment, cultural representation, and cultural property rights.
399. Independent Study. (C) Staff.
Directed study at the junior level.
406. (RELS406) Folklore and the Supernatural. (M) Staff.
Some beliefs in the supernatural have not diminished appreciably in modern cultures, in spite of many
predictions that they would do so. This course will examine traditional beliefs about supernatural
beings, supernatural realms, and humans who interact with these, as well as the historical
development of Western ideas of "the supernatural" itself.

Page 6 of 14

FOLKLORE
(AS) {FOLK}
420. Culture, Communication, and Body Language. (M) Staff.
Our perception and interpretation of body language is often subliminal, but is crucial in all
communication. This course will develop skills in observation and analysis of nonverbal behavior, with
a particular emphasis on cross cultural communication. In contemporary society, the analysis of
nonverbal communication has applications in education, psychology, business, advertising, medicine,
police work, the justice system, the military, religion, sports, and politics. As video and digital cameras
are increasingly being placed in public (and private!) locations, the ethical questions of why, how, and
by whom body movements and images are analyzed become a topic of primary importance for society.
Clothing, scents, gestures, eye contact, silence, music, dance, the built environment -- all are used to
construct relationships and develop markets for the new century. Readings from a number of
disciplinary perspectives will give us the opportunity to investigate these and other issues related to
the body and to nonverbal communication in multicultural societies.
436. (URBS436) Urban Folklore. (M) Staff.
This course examines the emergent aesthetic and expressive traditions of urban environments. Cities
are unique places with a wide range of folkloric traditions, including neighborhood stories, ethnic
festivals, and folk art. We will examine the material, customary, and verbal traditions that emerge in
everyday life, including contemporary legends, urban agriculture and food ways, public displays and
celebrations, body art, children s play, and Philadelphia s ethnic arts. We will consider how these
contemporary practices may be understood within a traditional folklore framework, as well as what
these practices reveal about contemporary values, anxieties, and concerns. Course work will involve
local field observations and will be of use to anyone studying human interaction, creative processes, or
urban ethnography.
SM 502. (ANTH506, GSWS502) Fieldwork Theory and Practice. (C) Hufford, M..
This graduate seminar explores the theory and practice of folkloristic ethnography, with a focus on
sites in West Philadelphia. Through reading and exercises in ethnographic observation and writing,
students consider the natureof the enthnographic encounter, its social functions and civic possibilities,
and the writings, archives, films, recordings and community events that form its outcomes. Historical
and contemporary reading provide an overview of ethnography as it has emerged in the social
sciences over the past century, while attention to the techniques and technologies in fieldnotes, sound
and video recording, photography, archiving, and sensing will develop students' skills as ethnographic
scholars, writers, and community activists. Undergraduates may enroll with permission.
SM 485. (COML385, EALC255, THAR485) Japanese Theatre. (B) Kano.
Japan has one of the richest and most varied theatrical traditions in the world. In this course, we will
examine Japanese theater in historical and comparative contexts. The readings and discussions will
cover all areas of the theatrical experience (script, acting, stage design, costumes, music, audience).
Audio-visual material will be used whenever appropriate and possible. The class will be conducted in
English, with all English materials.
499. Independent Study. (C) Staff.
Directed study at the senior level.

Page 7 of 14

FOLKLORE
(AS) {FOLK}
SM 500. Proseminar in Folklore. (A) Staff.
The shifting definition of folklore as a subject has allowed for the dynamic development of a field that
has never been content with narrow disciplinary territory. The course endeavors to provide an entry
into the breadth of folkloric expression--told, performed, enacted, believed, or made. We will also study
the sociopolitical and intellectual ground on which the study of folklore has been positioned over
roughly the last two hundred years. Readings and class discussions will clarify how scholars today
conceptualize "expressive culture," exemplify earlier ways of organizing and analyzing the material,
and explore the linkage between available technological recording tools and the shape of folklore
documentation and analysis. (required course for graduate students in folklore; open to others with
instructor's permission)
SM 503. (ANTH503, COML512, ENGL503) Issues in Folklore Theory. (C) Staff. An introduction to
folklore for graduate students, concentrating upon certain key issues in the theory and history of the
discipline.
"Fieldwork" is the term folklorists and scholars in related fields use to describe the process by which
they arrive at their discipline's subject matter. This includes everything from the pragmatic issues of
collecting and documenting materials to the complex relations involved whken people study people.
Readings, short writing assignments, and class discussions will probe this spectrum of concerns
comprehensively. Brief exercises are planned to experience different aspects of fieldwork. On this
background of theory and practice, students will work toward designing a fieldwork based project and
draft a funding proposal.
SM 510. Ethnography of Belief. (A) Hufford, D..
This course will examine traditional systems of supernatural belief with an emphasis on the role of
personal experience in their development and maintenance. The course will focus on the subject of
belief generally conceived of as being "folk" in some sense (e.g., beliefs in ghosts), but will not exclude
a consideration of popular and academic beliefs where appropriate (e.g., popular beliefs about UFO's
and theological doctrines of the immortality of the soul). The course will be multidisciplinary in scope.
This course serves as an introduction to folk belief systems and is open to qualified undergraduate
students.
SM 512. (RELS503) Spirituality, Religion and Health: Ethical, Cultural and Medical Issues. (M)
Hufford, D..
Although many have attributed modern medicine's success to its liberation from the ancient
association of healing with religion, recent research has shown that spirituality (the personal aspect of
the sacred) and relgion (the institutional forms of spiritual belief and practice) are powerful influences
in health decision-making and that most American patients want spiritual matters discussed with their
medical care. Additional research has documented effects of spiritual belief and relgious practice on
physical and mental health, ranging from general effects of religiosity on overall health and longevity to
double-blind studies of intercessory prayer. At the same time critics argue that the research is flawed
and that clinical involvement in religious matters is unethical. This topic, once marginal, now appears in
the pages of major medical journals and has drawn the attention of the National Institutes of Health.
This course will examine a variety of spiritual traditions in realtion to health, including major world
religions and those groups with highly specific health teachings such as Jehovah's Witnesses,
Christian Science and shamanic traditions. Competing points of view will be considered in ethical,
medical and cultural terms.
SM 518. (HSPV528) American Vernacular Architecture. (C) St. George.
This course explores the form and development of America's built landscape -- its houses, farm
buildings, churches, factories, and fields -- as a source of information on folk history, vernacular
culture, and architectural practice.

Page 8 of 14

FOLKLORE
(AS) {FOLK}
514. (HSSC514) Human Diversity and the Cultures of Medicine. (M) Hufford, D..
Over the past decade there has been a growing awareness of the importance of such basic aspects of
human diversity as culture, (religion, language), ethnicity, economic status, gender, age and disability
in health care as in other areas of life. This course will deal with (1) the social and cultural foundations
of health care in the modern world and (2) the ways that diversity affects and is affected by health
care. Because simplistic views of diversity reinforce stereotypes, the course necessarily recognizes
that each individual belongs to more than one group -- each person has a cultural background, a
gender, an age, may have one or more disabilites, and so forth. And even within groups, the
experiences and needs of each individual are unique. For example, there is no such person as "the
African-American patient" or "the female patient." Proper attention to diversity can enhance both
cultural and individually appropriate care for all persons. By dealing with these political, social and
cultural aspects of diversity and health care, this course will introduce students to complex and basic
issues of social construction ranging from cultural dimensions of medical ethics to the importance of
differing health traditions (from folk medicine to foodways to such beliefs as the idea that AIDS is a
genocidal government conspiracy).
SM 521. (ANTH521) Culture and Psychology: Identity, Self and Culture. (M) Hammarberg.
Psychological implications of differences in human experience arising from distinctive cultural patterns
of mankind considered with reference to a variety of problems.
527. (ANTH547, EDUC547, URBS547) Anthropology and Education. (M)
An introduction to the intent, approach, and contribution of anthropology to the study of socialization
and schooling in cross-cultual perspecive. Education is examined in traditional, colonial, and complex
industrial societies.
SM 531. (COML560, NELC582) Prose Narrative. (M) Ben-Amos.
The topics of discussion in the course are the following: the nature of narrative, narrative taxonomy
and terminology, performance in storytelling events, the transformation of historical experience into
narrative, the construction of symbolic reality, the psycho-social interpretation of folktales, the search
for minimal units, the historic-geographic method in folktale studies, the folktale in history and the
history of folktale research.
SM 532. (COML529, NELC682) Proverb, Riddle and Speech Metaphor. (M) Ben-Amos.
Through readings and collaborative projects this working seminar will explore the place of metaphor in
the genres of proverb and riddle and examine their position in oral communication in traditional and
modern societies. Critical readings of former definitions and models of riddles and metaphors will
enable students to obtain a comprehensive perspective of these genres that will synthesize functional,
structural, metaphoric, and rhetoric theories.
SM 533. (HSSC533) Folk and Unorthodox Health Systems. (B) Hufford, D..
Examination of theories concerning the origin and function of folk beliefs, investigation of the
expression of folk beliefs in legend, folk art, custom and ritual. Ritual is the focal genre for explanatory
purposes, and introduction to the social symbolic approach to analysis and interpretation is primary for
exploration and application.

Page 9 of 14

FOLKLORE
(AS) {FOLK}
535. (EDUC550) Children's Folklore. (M) Staff.
This course will examine the play, games, and oral lore of childhood cross culturally with an emphasis
on both the uniqueness of children's traditional communication, and its similarities with the culture in
which it is found. Classical study of children's lore genres, the complex analysis of play in live
performance, and the history of children's folklore research will be discussed. The course will
emphasize student field work and the recording of children's folklore in different contexts, and may be
of interest to those working in education, psychology, sociology, social welfare, and anthropology.
541. (MLA 541) Academic Writing and Research Design in the Arts and Sciences. (M)
Rabberman.
Have you ever noticed that scholars in different academic disciplines seem to speak different
languages? Have you wondered how scholars put together a plan for their research, explain their
findings, and organize and write their papers? This class is designed to introduce MLA students and
other advanced students to the research and writing conventions used by scholars in the arts and
sciences. With attention to disciplines in the humanities, social sciences, and sciences, we will identify
and explore some of the theories, sources, language, and qualitative and quantitative methodologies
that scholars use as they conduct original research in their fields. Throughout the class, we'll also
discuss writing conventions across the arts and sciences, with special attention to the structure of
argument; the use of evidence; voice and style in both traditional academic writing and more
innovative forms of writing; and documentation conventions. Students will develop an original research
project through incremental writing assignments, and will write a formal research proposal (15-20
pages), which can be used as their Capstone proposal if they wish.
SM 570. (ANTH570) Identity and the Life Course. (C) Hammarberg.
Examines life experience through autobiographies, journals, diaries, life histories and other selfreports in relation to culturally-constituted identities and life plans for different societies and subgroups.
Explores tensions, conflicts and creativity associated with sex, gender and age, rites of passage,
personal development, family systems, and identity processes and cultural integration. Requirements
include your own autobiographical writing and a consultant-based life-history analysis (15-20 page
limit).
SM 543. (ANTH543) Ethnographic Writing. (M) Rabberman, Theophano.
Ethnograpic research has brought anthropologists and folklorist, sociologists and oral historians face
to face with some compelling challenges as they describe specific social and cultual groups to a
variety of audiences: insiders and outsiders, academics and lay audiences. Attempting to be both
scientific and humanistic, ethnograhy has been accused of being neither. How can ethnographers best
understand their impact on the groups they study, and the impact of their research on their own
identity? How can ethnographers balance their personal agendas (related for example to political and
ideological goals, particulary Feminism and anti-imperalism) with an academic quest to produce
"scientific," well-supported research? And how have ethnographers experimented with style and genre
to break the chains of traditional ethnographic writing and better represent their experience in the
field?
SM 549. (ANTH545) Structural Analysis. (M) Ben-Amos.
In folklore scholarship, structural analysis extends over several genres. In this course we will examine
the analysis of genres from structural perspectives, the critique of structural analysis and the current
constructive directions that have emerged in the field in response to criticism of structuralism.

Page 10 of 14

FOLKLORE
(AS) {FOLK}
SM 575. (ENGL584, ENVS575, HSSC575) Environmental Imaginaries. (M) Hufford, M..
"Environmental imaginaries" names the contending discourses that order society around processes of
development and change. Behind public controversies over development, its subject, objects, and
technologies, are an array of collectively wrought fictions that relate people to their material
surroundings. We will be especially attentive to solipsistic cartesian fictions that enable the persistent
separation of culture from environment. How are these fictions produced, enacted, and materialized in
such diverse sites as Appalachian strip mines and Sea World, nature walks and prmit hearing?What
kind of environmental imaginary sustains the notion that "wisdon sits in places"? How are alternative
ways of knowing and being cojured through naming practices, narratives, and other speech genres, as
well as yardscapes, protest rallies and other forms of public display? We will traverse the border
between humanities and social sciences. How is Bakhtin's law of placement essential for urban
planners? Why is Bateson's notion of the thinking system vial for environmental writers? Moving from
theories of world making, multiple realities, and aesthetic ecologies through ethnographic literature on
culture and environment, and into your own experience,
obsevation, and written reflections, this seminar will explore the production of environmental
imaginaries acress a range of modern genres and practices. At stake is nothing less than place,
identity, and the nature of human being.
SM 580. Literature and Activism. (L) Watterson.
How do words transform people, places, and events in ways that bring about social change? What are
the motivations, methods, politics and implications of "doing good work?" How does an understanding
of doing good work depend on ones position: as non-profit worker, social justice advocate, community
activist, business person? In this interdisciplinary seminar we will cover current issues surrounding
social initiatives in many forms of literature: from fiction and non-fiction, to exhibits, web-sites, on-line
journals, grant-proposals, and ethnographic documentaries. Students will be given an opportunity to
do participatory research on local concerns: witnessing, critiquing, and putting words into action and
thereby gain pratical knowledge about how artists express themselves in ways that impact and
empower local community arts, cultural and education programs. Students may, for example work in
programs to learn about how art and community performance can bring people together through
location, spirit and tradition ccan empower people to adress difficult social issues. And, as art, after all,
is not only created by artist and craftsperons, but disseminated bothe informally and formally -through schools, museums and programs -- we will also explore how particular policies affect society
and local culture.
SM 603. (ANTH601) Food, Culture, and Society. (M) Staff.
Behind a simple proverb like "You are what you eat" lies a great deal of food for thought. Human
beings have always elaborated on the biological necessity of eating, and this course will explore the
myriad ways in which people work, think, and communicate with food. The course will survey the major
approaches from folklore, anthropology and related fields toward the role of food, cookery, feasting and
fasting in culture. Among the topics to be addressed are gender roles and differences in foodways, the
significance of food in historical transformations, the transmission of foodways in writing and
publishing, the relationship of foodways to ethnicity and region, the intimate relationship between food
and religion, and foodways in the global market place. Short exercises and a term project will provide
students with opportunities to research and write about foodways from different angles.

Page 11 of 14

FOLKLORE
(AS) {FOLK}
SM 605. (AFST605, ANTH605, COML605, MUSC605) Anthropology of Music. (C) Muller.
This seminar in ethnomusicology examines music from a cultural perspective. We investigate
theoretical and methodological issues that arise when music is situated within an ethnographic
context. Theories from anthropology and folklore are studied as they have been applied in
ethnomusicology, including structural-functionalism, structuralism, symbolic anthropology, and
performance theory. Topics include music and social structure; ritual and performance; social change
and historical process; class, ethnic identity, and gender. Case studies from around the globe enrich
this exploration of music in culture.
SM 639. (COML639, COMM639) Issues in Cultural Studies. (M) Zelizer.
This course tracks the different theoretical appropriations of "culture" and examines how the meanings
we attach to it depend on the perspectives through which we define it. The course first addresses
perspectives on culture suggested by anthropology, sociology, communication, and aesthetics, and
then considers the tensions across academic disciplines that have produced what is commonly known
as "cultural studies." The course is predicated on the importance of becoming cultural critics versed in
alternative ways of naming cultural problems, issues, and texts. The course aims not to lend closure to
competing notions of culture but to illustrate the diversity suggested by different approaches.
SM 606. (COML760, HSSC680) History of Folklore Studies. (C) Ben-Amos.
A survey of the theoretical basis and the historical development of research in international and
American folkloristics.
SM 620. (HIST620) Feminist Theories. (M) Staff. When the topic is "Feminist Theories," FOLK 620
will be crosslisted and the following description applies.
This course gives students the opportunity to engage with the most significant theoretical influences
upon feminist thought and historical scholarship in the last 35 years. Foucault, Bourdieu, Rubin, Butler,
and Freud are just some of the theorists we will discuss. We will also incorporate recent works in
feminist film theory and queer theory. Our focus is twofold: working collectively through difficult theory
that is too daunting to tackle alone, and exploring possible applications of feminist theory for feminist
politics and historical studies of women, gender and sexuality. Approximately half of our course
reading will be devoted to work designated as "theory" and the other half to recent applications by
historians.
SM 629. (COML662, NELC683, RELS605) Theories of Myth. (M) Ben-Amos.
Theories of myth are the center of modern and post-modern, structural and post-structural thought.
Myth has served as a vehicle and a metaphor for the formulation of a broad range of modern theories.
In this course we will examine the theoretical foundations of these approaches to myth focusing on
early thinkers such as Vico, and concluding with modern twentieth century scholars in several
disciplines that make myth the central idea of their studies.

Page 12 of 14

FOLKLORE
(AS) {FOLK}
SM 650. Folklore and Critical Regionalism. (M) Hufford, M..
In tandem with global political and economic restructuring, and the related unsettling of national and
local identities, scholarship on place has burgeoned. Recently, scholars from multiple disciplines have
called for a shift from identity-centered approaches to the study of place and region to a more critical
assessment of how the encounter of the local with "the larger than local" is articulated (Shuman,
1993). "Critical regionalism," a term hailing from architectual theory, names an effort to "frame a
dialogue between localized dimensionality and the imperatives of international architecture"
(Frampton, 1981). One way of framing this dailogue is to examine the imaginaries that span disjunct
places "twinned" through those larger than local processes, imaginaries that regionalize from within
(Herr, 1996). What are the foundations for such a project in folkloristics, and what is the role of
ethnography in cultivating critical regionalism? To get at such questions, we will examine selected
regional ethnographies and place-based folklore programs. Work for the course will include 1)
evaluating a regional ethnography and a public program inlight of critical regionalist theory and 2)
developing, with a partner or group, a proposal for a multi-site kethnography anchored partly in the
mid-Atlantic region.
702. Practicum. (C) Hufford, M..
Adanced students may arrange for a practicum. The nature of the learning task and the work to be
completed must be discussed both with the student's advisor and the practicum supervisor at the
hosting organization or institution. Suitable practicum sites are museums, community or state arts
organizations, not-for-profit organizations in the realm of cultural programming and advocacy, etc. The
practicum may be taken for credit only once.
706. (ANTH704, COML706, EDUC706, URBS706) Culture/Power/Identities. (A) Hall.
This course will introduce students to a conceptual language and the theoretical tools to analyze the
complex dynamics of racial, ethnic, gender, sexual, and class differences. The students will critically
examine the interrelationships between culture, power, and identities through the recent contributions
in cultural studies, critical pedagogy and post-structuralist theory and will explore the usefulness of
these ideas for improving their own work as researchers and as practitioners.
SM 715. (AFST705, ANTH705, COML715, GSWS705, MUSC705) Seminar in Ethnomusicology.
(M) Muller. Open to graduate students from all departments
Seminar on selected topics in ethnomusicology. Freedom is a pervasive idea in the twentieth century,
in the United States and elsewhere. This seminar will examine a range of texts concerned with the
idea of freedom, politically, philosophically, and musically. A key part of the seminar will focus on free
jazz, as it has been recorded in the twentieth century, and as it occurs in live performances on Penn
campus and elsewhere in Philadelphia.
SM 725. (ANTH725) Bodylore. (M) Hufford, M.
Bodylore, a term coined in the late 1980s by folklorist Katharine Young, names an emerging subfield
focused on the body's role in the making of social meanings. In this seminar, we'll consider the body as
it is theorized by Bakhtin, Bourdieu, Douglas, Harvey, Stewart, Young, and others, and we'll turn to
selected ethnographic case studies to explore problems of embodiment. How does the body enact the
discourses that constitute it? How do our ways of imagining and interpreting the body bear on our
ways of ordering the social and natural world? How is the body's dual status as both mode and object
of knowing (Stewart) negotiated in ethnographic and scientific practice? How might a more humanistic
ethnography undo and displace the dualisms of mind and body, body and self, and perhaps even
return us to the body as a measure of all things (Harvey)? Work for the course will include in-class
presentations, participation in electronic and face-to-face discussion about the readings, and a final
paper.

Page 13 of 14

FOLKLORE
(AS) {FOLK}
999. Independent Study and Research. (C)
SM 770. (AFRC771, MUSC770) Seminar in Afro-American Music. (M) Ramsey.
This seminar treats selected aspects of the history, aesthetics, criticism and historiography of AfricanAmerican music. Topics will vary each time this course is offered.

Page 14 of 14

