FRENCH
(AS) {FREN}
SM 232. (COLL221, COML219) Perspectives in French Literature: The Individual and Society.
(B)
This basic course in literature provides an overview of French literature and acquaints students with
major literary trends through the study of representative works from each period. Special emphasis is
placed on close reading of texts in order to familiarize students with major authors and their
characteristics and with methods of interpretation. Students are expected to take an active part in
class discussion in French. French 232 has as its theme the Individual and Society.
SM 233. Empire and De-Colonization. (C)
SM 308. TOPICS IN FRENCH CULTURE. (C)
How did France go from a nation with a monarch styled the Most Christian King
SM 310. LITERARY HISTORY. (M)
Please see the French department's website for the course description. https://www.sas.upenn.edu/
french/pc
L/R 386. (CINE386) PARIS IN FILM. (M)
See the Romance Languages Department's website at http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/roml for a current
description.
SM 537. (COML546, ENGL546, GSWS536) THE NOVEL AND MARRIAGE.
SM 560. (COML561, ENGL545) STUDIES IN THE 18TH C. (C)
Please check the French department's website for the course description. https://www.sas.upenn.edu/
french/pc
SM 110. Elementary French I. (C)
French 110 is the first semester of the elementary-level sequence designed to develop funcional
proficiency in the four skills and gain familiarity with French and Francophone culture. The primary
emphasis is on the development of the oral-aural skills, speaking and listening. Readings on topics in
French culture as well as frequent writing practice are also included in the course.
As in other French courses, class will be conducted entirely in French. You will be guided through a
variety of communicative activities in class which will expose you to a rich input of spoken French and
lead you from structured practice to free expression. You will be given frequent opportunity to practice
your newly acquired vocabulary and grammatical structures in small group and pair work which
simulate real-life situations. The course will introduce you to French and Francophone culture through
authentic materials including written documents, simple articles, songs, films, videos and taped
conversations between native speakers. Out-of-class homework will require practice with CDs as well
as regular writing practice. The course will also invite you to explore the Francophone world on the
Internet.
SM 112. Accelerated Elementary French. (A)
French 112 is an intensive elementary language course covering the equivalent of French 110 and
120 in one semester. Students must have a departmental permit to register. The course is normally
open only to students who have no previous knowledge of French, and who have already fulfilled the
language requirement in another language.

Page 1 of 15

FRENCH
(AS) {FREN}
SM 120. Elementary French II. (C) Prerequisite(s): French 110.
French 120 is the second semester continuation of the elementary-level sequence designed to
develop functional proficiency in the four skills and gain familiarity with French and Francophone
culture. The primary emphasis is on the development of the oral-aural skills, speaking and listening.
Readings on topics in French culture as well as frequent writing practice are also included in the
course.
As in other French courses, class will be conducted entirely in French. You will be guided through a
variety of communicative activities in class which will expose you to rich input of spoken French and
lead you from structured practice to free expression. You will be given frequent opportunity to practice
your newly acquired vocabulary and grammatical structures in small group and pair work which
simulate real-life situations. The course will introduce you to French and Francophone culture through
authentic materials including written documents, simple articles, songs, films, videos, and taped
conversations between native speakers. Out-of-class homework will require practice with CDs as well
as regular writing practice. The course will also invite you to explore the Francophone world on the
Internet.
SM 121. Elementary French for "False Beginners". (A)
French 121 is an intensive one-semester language course for students who have had some French
before but who can benefit from a complete review of elementary French. Students with an SATII
score between 380-440 or a placement score between 18-29 should enroll in French 121. This course
will provide a re-introduction of the basic structures of French with intensive work on speaking and
listening designed to prepare students to take Intermediate French. Due to the nature of the course,
the first half will progress rapidly with much more difficult material being presented after the midterm
period.
As in other French courses, class will be conducted entirely in French. You will be guided through a
variety of communicative activities in class that will expose you to a rich input of spoken French and
lead you from structured practice to free expression. You will be given frequent opportunity to practice
your newly acquired vocabulary and grammatical structures in small group and pair work activities
which simulate real-life situations. The course will introduce you to French and Francophone culture
through authentic materials including written documents, simple articles, songs, films, videos, and
taped conversations between native speakers. Out-of-class homework will require frequent practice
with audio and video material, and will include daily written assignments. The course will also invite
you to explore the Francophone world on the Internet.
SM 130. Intermediate French I. (C) Prerequisite(s): Completion of French 120 or 121, or placement
into third-semester French.
French 130 is the first half of a two-semester intermediate sequence designed to help you attain a
level of proficiency that should allow you to function comfortably in a French-speaking environment.
You are expected to have already learned the most basic grammatical structures in elementary
French and you will review these on your own in the course workbook. This course will build on your
existing skills in French, increase your confidence and ability to read, write, speak and understand
French, and introduce you to more refined lexical items, more complex grammatical structures, and
more challenging cultural material.
As in other French courses at Penn, class will be conducted entirely in French. In addition to
structured oral practice, work in class will include frequent communicative activities such as roleplays, problem-solving tasks, discussions, and debates, often carried out in pairs or small groups.
Through the study of authentic materials such as articles, poems, songs, films, videos, you will
deepen your knowledge of the French-speaking world. Daily homework will require listening practice
with audio and video material, in addition to regular written exercises in the workbook and frequent
composition practice.
Students who have completed French 120, or with an SATII score of 450-540 or a lacement score
between 30 and 35 should enroll in this course.

Page 2 of 15

FRENCH
(AS) {FREN}
SM 134. Accelerated Intermediate French. (B)
An intensive two-credit course covering the first and second semester of the intermediate year. See
descriptions of French 130 and 140. Students must have a departmental permit to register. Also
offered in the summer Penn-in-Tours program in France.
SM 211. French for the Professions I. (C) Prerequisite(s): Intermediate-high/advanced level of
French (French 202 highly recommended). No business background necessary.
This content-based language course, taught in French, introduces economic, business and
professional terminology through the study of the following topics: financial institutions (banking, stock
market and insurance); business practices (business letters and resumes); trade and advertising; the
internal structure and legal forms of French companies. The course also emphasizes verbal
communication through three components: 1) In-class activities such as problem-solving tasks,
discussions and debates. 2) The study of authentic materials such as newspapers and magazines'
articles, video clips, and radio shows. 3) A series of students' presentations.
Finally, in order to use and practice the new economic and business terminology studied in this
course, and to also further explore the structure, the management, and the operations of the French
companies, students will work in pairs on a research project about a major French company of their
choice.
One of the other goals of this course is to also prepare the students to take one of the exams
offered by the Paris Chamber of Commerce and Industry: the Diplome de Francais Professionnel,
Affaires, C1. This exam will be held on campus in April.
SM 140. Intermediate French II. (C) Prerequisite(s): Completion of French 130 or placement into
fourth-semester French.
French 140 is the second half of a two-semester intermediate sequence designed to help you attain a
level of proficiency that should allow you to function comfortably in a French-speaking environment.
You are expected to have already learned the most basic grammatical structures in elementary
French and you will review these on your own in the course workbook. This course will build on your
existing skills in French, increase your confidence and ability to read, write, speak and understand
French, and introduce you to more refined lexical items, more complex grammatical structures, and
more challenging cultural material.
This course focuses on the culture of French-speaking countries beyond the borders of France.
Along with your classmates, you will explore the cities of Dakar, Fort-de-France and Marrakesh,
investigating the diversity of the francophone world through film, literature and music. As in other
French courses at Penn, class is conducted entirely in French. In addition to structured oral practice,
work in class will include frequent communicative activities such as problem-solving tasks,
discussions, and debates, often carried out in pairs or small groups. Daily homework will require
researching in the library and on the Internet, listening practice with video clips, in addition to regular
written exercises in the workbook.
SM 180. Advanced French in Residence. (E) Corequisite(s): Residence in Modern Language
House.
Open only to residents in La Maison Francaise. Participants earn 1/2 c.u. per semester.

Undergraduate-Level Courses

Page 3 of 15

FRENCH
(AS) {FREN}
SM 202. Advanced French. (C) Prerequisite(s): Open to students who have completed the language
requirement. Students who are continuing from French 134 or 140 should take French 202 before
moving on to more advanced French courses.
French 202 is a one-semester third-year level French course. It is designed to prepare students for
subsequent study in upper-level courses in French and francophone literature, linguistics, civilization,
cinema, etc. It is required for students who have completed 140 and recommended for those with an
equivalent level, wishing to continue in more advanced French courses or preparing for study abroad.
Exceptions can be made with permission of the undergraduate chair.
It is also an appropriate course for those students who have time for only one more French course
and wish to solidify their knowledge of the language by continuing to work on all four skills--speaking,
listening, reading and writing. Students' work will be evaluated both in terms of progress in language
skillsand of ability to handle and engage in the content areas.
This course does not include a systematic review of French grammar (that is done in FREN 212).
Nevertheless, through the diverse writing assessments (e.g., creative writing; essays), the various
textual and visual references (e.g., novels; articles; films; clips), the communicative approach, the
students will play an active role in their learning process and consequently will be led to consolidate
and deepen their grammatical competence.
The class studies two thematic units dealing with a wide variety of magazine articles, literary texts,
historical documents, movies, songs, etc. In the first dossier, students get a chance to expand their
knowledge of French history, with one major focus on World War II and the German occupation of
France. In the second dossier, students study contemporary France focusing on issues such as the
modern family, education, pop culture. While touching upon issues of identity in France, the class
engages the students into an intercultural dialogue which enables them to be more aware of the
differences and similarities between the two countries.
SM 212. Advanced French Grammar and Composition. (C)
Intensive review of grammar integrated into writing practice. A good knowledge of basic French
grammar is a prerequisite (French 202 or equivalent is recommended). Conducted entirely in French,
the course will study selected grammatical difficulties of the French verbal and nominal systems
including colloquial usage. Frequent oral and written assignments with opportunity for rewrites.
Articles from French newspapers and magazines, literary excerpts, and a novel or short stories will
be used as supplementary materials in order to prepare students to take content courses in French in
disciplines other than French.
SM 217. French Phonetics. (C)
This course is designed to provide students with a solid foundation in French phonetics and
phonology. Part of the course will be devoted to learning how to produce discourse with native-like
pronunciation and intonation. The course will also focus on improving aural comprehension by
examining stylistic and regional differences in spoken French.

Page 4 of 15

FRENCH
(AS) {FREN}
SM 214. Advanced French Composition and Conversation. (C) Prerequisite(s): French 202 and/or
212 recommended.
Entitled "Contemporary French Society through its Media," this course is intended to improve
speaking and writing skills by offering extensive practice in a variety of styles and forms. It will also
help students better understand contemporary French culture, thought and modes of expression. The
content is organized around current events and the themes of identity and art. Activities include the
study, analysis and emulation of model texts as well as discussion and debates about events and
social issues as covered by the French news media (television, print, Internet sources). Students will
practice oral skills in a variety of ways, including video blogs and group presentations on selected
current events. Written practice will comprise reflective journals, essays and collaborative work on
Web projects.
The goal of this course is to help students attain the Advanced level of proficiency in speaking and
writing (by ACTFL standards). The specific language functions we will work on are narration,
description, offering and soliciting advice and opinions, expressing feelings, critique and analysis,
argumentation.
(Recommended for students who are planning to study abroad in France)
SM 226. French History and Culture until 1789. (A) History & Tradition Sector. All
classes.Prerequisite(s): Two advanced courses taken at Penn or equivalent.
An introduction to the social, political and historical institutions of France from the earliest times until
the Revolution of 1789. Required for majors in French and also of particular interest to majors in
history, international relations, Wharton students, etc.
This course will be taught in French.
SM 227. French History and Culture 1789-1945. (B) Prerequisite(s): Two advanced courses taken
at Penn or equivalent.
French cultural and social history from the Revolution of 1789 to the liberation of Paris in 1944.
Readings in primary and secondary sources, including political documents, literary excerpts and
contemporary articles.
Required for majors, also of particular interest to majors in History, International Relations,
Wharton students, etc. The course is taught in French.
SM 228. Contemporary France. (C)
This course focuses on the major cultural and political events that have transformed French society
from 1945 to the first decades of the new millennium. Using a wide range of print, visual, and online
media, this class allows students to examine and research contemporary France by way of the main
issues, movements and debates that have marked the last decades. Among these are: France's
postwar International relations; Memory and national identity; Migration, immigration and
multiculturalism; Religion and/in the Republic; Civil society; Intellectual movements and cultural
productions.

Page 5 of 15

FRENCH
(AS) {FREN}
SM 229. (LING229) French in the World. (C)
Le Francais dans le monde/French in the World provides a survey of the sociolinguistics of the French
language in the contemporary world in order to elucidate how societal changes influence the manner
and the contexts in which the French language is spoken. Case studies focus on various parts of the
Francophone world, including Africa, Southeast Asia, and the Americas. The course considers
questions such as the following: What effect does contact with other languages have on the way
French is spoken? Which variety (or varieties) of French represents "good" or standard language
use? How do political forces and movements affect the evolution of French? What is the present and
future role of the French language in the face of globalization? How are language attitudes similar and
different among French-speaking and English-speaking regions of the world? In what ways does the
language we speak and the way we speak it shape our identities? Readings and class discussions
are in French.
L/R 230. (CINE245) Masterpieces of French Cinema. (A)
This course will introduce students to key films of the French film canon, selected over a period
ranging from the origins of French cinema to the present. Students will also be introduced to the key
critical concepts (such as the notion of the "auteur" film genre) informing the discussion of films in
France. The films will be studied in both a historical and theoretical context, related to their period
styles (e.g. "le realisme poetique," "la Nouvelle Vague," etc.), their "auteurs," the nature of the French
star system, the role of the other arts, as well to the critical debates they have sparked among critics
and historians. Students will acquire the analytical tools in French to discuss films as artistic and as
cultural texts.
Please note: This course follows a Lecture/Recitation format. The Lecture (FREN 230-401/CINE
245-401) is taught in English. For French credit: please register for both FREN 230-401 (lecture) and
FREN 230-402 (recitation); the FREN 230-402 recitation is conducted in French. For Cinema Studies
credit: please register for CINE 245-401 (lecture) and CINE 245-403 (recitation); both are taught in
English.
SM 231. (COLL221, COML218) Perspectives in French Literature. (A) Arts & Letters Sector. All
Classes.
This basic course in literature provides an overview of French literature and acquaints students with
major literary trends through the study of representative works from each period. Students are
expected to take an active part in class discussion in French. French 231 has as its theme the
presentation of love and passion in French literature.
This course was previously offered as French 221.
SM 290. The French Short Story. (M)
SM 301. (CINE301, GSWS301) French Identity in the Twentieth Century. (C)
Topics vary. Please see the French Department's website for a description of the current offerings:
https://www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc

Page 6 of 15

FRENCH
(AS) {FREN}
SM 313. French for the Professions II. (B) Prerequisite(s): An intermediate high to advanced level of
French. French for the Professions I (211) highly advisable. No business background necessary.
The course, conducted entirely in French, emphasizes verbal communication in business professional
situations through three components. First, a series of student's presentations, in-class activities
(using newspapers' articles, technical readings, radio shows and films), and debates on the following
topics (list not exhaustive) related to France's economy and society: The role of the State in France's
economy; the French fiscal system; Labor (impact of the 35-hour work week, "conges," women in the
workplace, etc.); Regions of France (production); major French industries/companies/brands; France's
major imports/exports; "Green business"; Business of pop culture.
Second, as effective communication is based not only on linguistic proficiency but also on cultural
proficiency, cultural differences mostly between Americans and French will be explored.
Finally, throughout the semester, students will work in groups on the creation of their own business,
association, or other organization and will be invited to present their project to the class at the end of
the semester. On completion of the course, students will also have the opportunity to take the
Diplome de Francais Professionnel-DFP Affaires (C1) administered by the Paris Chamber of
Commerce and Industry.
SM 311. (COML309) French Thought After 1968. (C) Yue Zhuo.
SM 322. France and the European Union. (B)
This course aims to provide an understanding of the European Union as a complex entity: its history,
institutions, challenges and future. After reviewing the history of European integration and describing
the Community's institutions, common programs and market, we will consider a wide variety of
themes important to Europe: economics, business, science, education, immigration, the environment,
social issues, national and European identity, a Federal Europe vs. a Europe of nations, European
social/cultural models vs. American liberalism, relations between the EU and the rest of the world.
Students will be responsible for pursuing substantive research on these and other topics and
participating actively in debates. We will also follow and discuss current events that are pertinent to
the EU in general and to France in particular.
This class will be conducted entirely in French and is designed to improve cross-cultural
understanding and communicative skills in the presentational, interpretive and interpersonal modes.
SM 325. Advanced French Translation. (B) Prerequisite(s): French 212 or equivalent recommended.
This course provides an introduction to the theory and practice of translation and is designed to help
foster a critical understanding of differences between French and English syntactical and lexical
patterns. It will introduce students to theoretical concepts and problems of translation, with the
ultimate goal being to improve their ability to communicate in more authentic-sounding French.
Students will have the opportunity to practice translation individually and to work with their peers on a
variety of projects (advertising, journalistic and literary texts, movie and broadcast news subtitling)
and to engage in critique and discussion of others' translations. This course will help students refine
their language skills and navigate more proficiently between these cultures and language systems.
(Designed for students who already have a solid foundation in French and English grammar)
SM 330. Medieval Literature. (M)
An introductory course to the literature of the French Middle Ages. French literature began in the 11th
and 12th centuries. This course examines the extraordinary period during which the French literary
tradition was first established by looking at a number of key generative themes: Identity, Heroism,
Love, Gender. All readings and discussions in French.

Page 7 of 15

FRENCH
(AS) {FREN}
SM 340. French Renaissance Literature. (C)
This course introduces a diverse and fascinating era, which marks the beginning of the early modern
period. It examines the political, historical, and social context of France and investigates how
contemporary writers and poets translated the discoveries of Humanism into their works. Authors to
be studied include the poets Clement Marot, Maurice Sceve, Louise Labe, Pernette Du Guillet,
Ronsard and Du Bellay. In addition, a number of stories from Marguerite de Navarre's rewriting of the
"Decameron" (L'Heptameron), as well as Rabelais's comic work "Pantagruel" and some essays of
Montaigne will be analyzed.
SM 350. 17th Century French Literature. (C)
We will read a number of the masterpieces of the Golden Age of French literature, including works by
Moliere, Racine, Lafayette, and La Fontaine. We will place special emphasis on the social and political
context of their creation (the court of Versailles and the most brilliant years of Louis XIV's reign).
SM 360. (GSWS360, HIST211) French Literature of the 18th Century. (M)
Topics vary. For current course description, please see French Dpartment's webpage: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 370. French Literature of the 19th Century. (M)
Topic changes each semester.
SM 379. Short Narratives in Fantastic Literature. (M)
This course will explore fantasy and the fantastic in short tales of 19th and 20th century French
literature. A variety of approaches - thematic, psychoanalytic, cultural, narratological - will be used in
an attempt to define the subversive force of a literary mode that contributes to shedding light on the
dark side of the human psyche by interrogating the "real," making visible the unseen and articulating
the unsaid. Such broad categories as distortions of space and time, reason and madness, order and
disorder, sexual transgressions, self and other, will be considered.
Readings usually include "recits fantastiques" by Merimee, Gautier, Nerval, Villiers de l'Isle-Adam,
Maupassant, Breton, Jean Ray, Mandiargues and others.
L/R 382. (CINE382, COML372) Horror Cinema. (C) Met. The course will be taught in English. French
credit by arrangement with Instructor.
The purpose of this course is to provide an introduction to the history and main themes of the
supernatural/horror film from a comparative perspective. Films considered will include: the German
expressionists masterworks of the silent era, the Universal classics of the 30's and the low-budget
horror films produced by Val Lewton in the 40's for RKO in the US, the 1950's color films of sex and
violence by Hammer studios in England, Italian Gothic horror or giallo (Mario Brava) and French
lyrical macabre (Georges Franju) in the 60's, and on to contemporary gore. In an effort to better
understand how the horror film makes us confront out worst fears and our most secret desires alike,
we will look at the genre's main iconic figures (Frankenstein, Dracula, Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, etc.) as
well as issues of ethics, gender, sexuality, violence, spectatorship through a variety of critical lenses
(psychoanalysis, socio-historial and cultural context, aesthetics,...).
SM 380. (COML381) Literature of the Twentieth Century. (M)
This course, the theme of which changes from semester to semester, provides an introduction to
important trends in twentieth-century literature. Please check the French Department's website for the
course description. https://www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc

Page 8 of 15

FRENCH
(AS) {FREN}
SM 384. The French Novel of the Twentieth Century. (M)
Please check the French department's website for the course description: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/
french/pc
SM 385. Modern French Theater. (M)
A study of major movements and major dramatists from Giraudoux and Sartre to the theater of the
absurd and its aftermath.
SM 389. France and Its Others. (M)
A historical appreciation of the impact of the exploration, colonization, and immigration of other
peoples on French national consciousness, from the 16th century to the present. Emphasis is on the
role of the Other in fostering critiques of French culture and society. Readings include travel literature,
anthropological treatises, novels, and historical documents. Oral presentations and several short
papers are included in the course.
SM 390. (AFRC391, AFST390) Survey Francophone Literature. (M)
A brief introduction about the stages of French colonialism and its continuing political and cultural
consequences, and then reading in various major works -- novels, plays, poems -- in French by
authors from Quebec, the Caribbean, Africa (including the Maghreb), etc. Of interest to majors in
International Relations, Anthropology and African Studies as well as majors in French. Taught in
French.
SM 391. Litterature Quebecoise. (M)
SM 393. (COML393) Africa & African Diaspora. (M) Taught in English
This course will take the form of an introductory seminar designed to provide undergraduate students
an overview of significant themes and issues focusing on the historical, political and cultural
relationships between Africans and their descendants abroad. It will encompass: a review of different
historical periods and geographical locations, from Ancient Egypt to modern American, Caribbean
and African states; a critical evaluation of social movements and theories that have developed in the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries among scholars of different origins in their attempt to reconstruct
Africa as a center and the Diaspora as a specific cultural space; and, an exploration of
representations of Africa and the Diaspora in canonical literary works and other forms of fiction like
the visual arts.
SM 394. (AFRC293) Topics in Caribbean Literature. (M)
This course will introduce students to the literature of the French-speaking Caribbean (West Indian
Literature) in the context of literary history and modern culture. Select works will be examined
individually and in relation to each other. We will explore the themes that link these works,
comparisons and contrasts in literary techniques, and approaches to language.
SM 395. (CINE395) Topics in African Literature. (M)
Topics vary from semester to semester.
398. Honors Thesis. (C)

Page 9 of 15

FRENCH
(AS) {FREN}
399. Independent Study. (C)
See instructor for permission.

Graduate Level Courses
SM 500. Proseminar. (M)
This course will provide a forum for collective preparation for the Master's exam.
SM 512. History of Literary Theory. (M)
An exploration of literary theory centering on a few concepts (tradition, textuality, interpretation,
ideology, authority) and problematizing the ways in which we read literature.
SM 550. (COML549) Etudes sur le XVII siecle. (M)
The specific topics of the seminar vary from semester to semester, depending on the instructor and
his/her choice. Among the topics previously covered, and likely to be offered again, are the following:
The Theatre of Jean Racine, Fiction of Mme de Lafayette, The Moralists (La Bruyere, La
Rochefoucauld, Perrault ), Realistic Novels (Sorel's Francion, Scarron's Le Roman Comique,
Furetiere's Le Roman Bourgeois). Students Give oral and written reports, and write a term paper.
SM 573. (ARTH573, CINE515, COML570, ENGL573, GRMN573) Topics in Criticism and Theory.
(M)
SM 580. Studies in 20th-Century French Literature. (M)
SM 593. (AFRC593, AFST593) Studies in Francophone Literature. (M)
Topics will vary. Seminar will focus on one area, author, or "problematique" in Francophone studies.
Examples of an area-focused seminar: The African Contemporary novel or Francophone Caribbean
writers. Example of a single-author Seminar: The Poetry and Drama of Aime Cesaire: Examples of a
thematic approach: writing and national identity, postcolonial conditions, autobiography. Please see
the department's website for the current course description: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 582. (COML589) Fantastic Literature 19th/20th Centuries. (M)
This course will explore fantasy and the fantastic in short tales of 19th- and 20th-century French
literature. A variety of approaches -- thematic, psychoanalytic, cultural, narratological -- will be used in
an attempt to test their viability and define the subversive force of a literary mode that contributes to
shedding light on the dark side of the human psyche by interrogating the "real," making visible the
unseen and articulating the unsaid. Such broad categories as distortions of space and time, reason
and madness, order and disorder, sexual transgressions, self and other will be considered. Readings
will include "recits fantastiques" by Merimee, Gautier, Nerval, Maupassant, Breton, Pieyre de
Mandiargues, Jean Ray and others.
SM 590. (AFRC591, AFST560, COML596) Introduction to Francophone Studies. (M)
An introduction to major literary movements and authors from five areas of Francophonie: the
Maghreb, West Africa, Central Africa, the Caribbean and Quebec.
SM 591. Francophone Cultures. (M)

Page 10 of 15

FRENCH
(AS) {FREN}
SM 595. Travel Literature. (M)
Within the context of the ill-defined, heterogeneous genre of the travelogue and of today's age of
globalization, CNN and the Internet, this seminar will examine the poetics of travel writing based
largely albeit not exclusively on travel notebooks, or journaux/carnets de voyage, spanning the XXth
century from beginning to end. One of the principal specificities of the texts studied is that they all
evince to a lesser or greater degree a paradoxical resistance both to the very idea of travel(ing) as
such and to the mimetic rhetoric of traditional travel narratives. We will therefore look at how modern
or postmodern texts question, revisit, subvert or reject such key notions of travel literature as
exoticism, nostalgia, exile, nomadism, otherness or foreignness vs. selfhood, ethnology and
autobiography, etc.
Authors considered will include Segalen, Morand, Michaux, Leiris, Levi-Strauss, Butor, Le Clezio,
Baudrillard, Bouvier, Jouanard, Leuwers.
SM 600. Old French. (B)
A systematic study of the structure of Old French including phonology, morphology, syntax, and
lexicon as well as intensive practice in reading Old French texts with an emphasis on 12th- and 13thcentury texts. By the end of the semester, students should be able to read works in Old French with
the aid of a dictionary. Attention will be paid to the chronological differences between earlier and later
Old French as well as to the major dialectal differences. Students will also be familiarized with the
major research tools, dictionaries and grammars for working on Old French.
SM 601. (ITAL690, ROML690, SPAN609) Language Teaching/Learning. (M)
Please check the French department's website for the course description. https://www.sas.upenn.edu/
french/pc
SM 602. Theory and Criticism. (M)
Please see the department's website for current course description: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/
french/pc
SM 603. Poetique Du Recit.
SM 606. Postcolonial Theory. (M)
SM 610. Intro to French Cinema. (M)
SM 611. (CINE611) Topics in Cinema Studies. (M)
SM 612. Film Noir. (M)
Topics vary. Please see the French department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 619. (COML619) Poetique du Recit. (M)
SM 620. Global Perspectives in French Studies. (A)
Topics vary. Please see the department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc

Page 11 of 15

FRENCH
(AS) {FREN}
SM 630. (COML630, ITAL630) Introduction to Medieval French Literature. (M)
Topics vary. Previous topics include The Grail and the Rose, Literary Genres and Transformations,
and Readings in Old French Texts. Please see French department's website for current course
description: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 631. Epic and Romance. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see French department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 634. Le Roman de la Rose. (M)
SM 635. (COML714) Late Medieval Literature. (M)
One possible topic is "History and Allegory: Problems of Representation." Considers several
privileged cases of the relationship between the contemporary historical subject (dangerous,
unstable) and the allegorical mode of representation (literary-philosophical, distancing, cerebrally
interpretive). Texts to be studied include the "Roman de Fauvel" (and the spectacular corruption of
Philippe le Bel's court in early 13th-century Paris); Christine de Pizan's "Epistre d'Othea" and
"Jehanne d'Arc" (and mythographic-allegorical treatments of the "crisis of the Hundred Years War" in
the late 14th and early 15th centuries); as well as Froissart and de la Sale. Please see French
department's website for current course description: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 650. (COML651, GRMN651, HIST651) Studies in the 17th Century. (M)
Topics of discussion will vary from semester to semester. One possible topic is "The Royal Machine:
Louis XIV and the Versailles Era." We will examine certain key texts of what is known as the Golden
Age of French literature in tandem with a number of recent theoretical texts that could be described
as historical. Our goal will be to explore the basis of "the new historicism," a term that is designed to
cover a variety of critical systems that try to account for the historical specificity and referentiality of
literary texts. Please see department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 638. (COML638, MUSC710) Topics: Medieval Culture. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 640. (COML643, GSWS640) Studies in the Renaissance. (M)
Topics vary. Previous topics have included Rabelais and M. de Navarre, Montaigne, and Renaissance
and Counter-Renaissance. Please see French department's website for current course description:
https://www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 641. French Poetry of the 16th Century. (M)
SM 652. (COML652, GSWS652) Early Modern French Women Writers. (M)
Topics of will vary. Please see department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc

Page 12 of 15

FRENCH
(AS) {FREN}
SM 654. (COML658, ENGL730, GRMN665, MUSC654) Early Modern Seminar. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 660. (COML620, ENGL748, GSWS748) Studies in the Eighteenth Century. (M)
Topics of discussion will vary from semester to semester. One possible topic is "Masterpieces of the
Enlightenment." We will read the most influential texts of the Enlightenment, texts that shaped the
social and political consciousness characteristic of the Enlightenment--for example, the meditations
on freedom of religious expression that Voltaire contributed to "affaires" such as the "affaire Calas."
We will also discuss different monuments of the spirit of the age--its corruption (Les Liaisons
dangereuses), its libertine excesses and philosophy (La Philosophie dans le boudoir). We will define
the specificity of 18th-century prose (fiction), guided by a central question: What was the
Enlightenment? Please see department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 662. (COML661) The Epistolary Novel. (M)
From the Regency to the Revolution, the French 18th century was obsessed with the present
moment. In literature, this obsession manifests itself most clearly in the epistolary novel, which
became the privileged form of expression chosen by all the major authors of the age. Because of the
rise of epistolarity, the art of "writing to the moment," in Richardson's memorable formulation, must be
seen as one of the Enlightenment's principal voices. And, for the first time, the letter became a highly
valued means of communication, in both the private and the public domains.
We will read most of the major epistolary novels beginning with the genre's first classic, "Lettres
portugaises," and ending with its masterpiece, "Liaisons dangereuses." We will consider some real
correspondences--for example, Sevigne's and Diderot's--to see how the urge to turn them into novels
proved irresistible, to editors and authors alike. Finally, we will read several examples of what was
known as the "public" letter, philosophical texts that used the epistolary form (for example, Diderot's
"Lettre sur les aveugles"), to see how the techniques of epistolarity survived the transition into the
realm of the polemical.
SM 670. (COML669) 19th-Century Studies. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 671. 19th-Century French Poetry. (M)
Topics of discussion will vary from semester to semester. A representative description follows:
Rimbaud, Lautreamont, Mallarme. One half of the course will be devoted to Rimbaud and
Lautreamont, the second half to Mallarme. We will attempt to focus on such points as the revolution in
poetic language, the textual body, the (en)gendering of the subject. Students will be required to read
critical and theoretical writings on these questions, and discuss them in class presentations. Please
see department's website for current course description: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 672. Major Authors 19th Century. (M)
SM 673. 19th Century Literature and the Arts. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc

Page 13 of 15

FRENCH
(AS) {FREN}
SM 674. The 19th-Century French Novel. (M)
The development of the French novel in the 19th-century: structure and theory, ideological and
historical questions. Focus may vary.
SM 675. Topics in 19th Century Literature. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 676. Science and Literature. (M)
SM 680. (CINE680, COML595) Studies in the 20th Century. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see the French department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 686. Major Authors 20th/21st Century. (M)
SM 681. Studies in Modern French Poetry. (M)
How does one approach the modern poetic text which ever since the Mallarmean "crise de vers"
appears to have cut loose from all referential anchoring and traditional markers (prosody, versification,
etc.)? This course will present an array of possible methodological answers to this question, focusing
on poetic forms and manifestations of brevity and fragmentation. In addition to being submitted to
precise formal and textual inquiries, each text or work will be the point of departure for the analysis of
a specific theoretical issue and/or an original practice - e.g., genetic criticism, translation theory, the
poetic "diary", aphoristic modes of writing, quoting and rewriting practices, etc. Texts by key modern
poets (Ponge, Chazal, Du Bouchet, Jourdan, Jabes, Michaux).
SM 684. The French Novel of the 20th Century. (M)
Topics vary. Please check the French department's website for the course description. https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 685. Studies in 20th Century French Theater. (M)
SM 687. Studies in 21st Century. (M)
Topics will vary.
SM 688. Contemporary French Culture. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 690. Francophone Studies. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 692. Caribbean Studies. (M)

Page 14 of 15

FRENCH
(AS) {FREN}
SM 693. (AFRC693, AFST693) Topics in Postcolonial Studies. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see French department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 694. Francophone Africa. (M)
SM 695. Postcolonial France. (M)
SM 696. (AFST696, COML696) POSTCO THEORY FRANCOPHON. (C)
SM 700. (AFRC708, COML708) Topics in Interdisciplinary Studies.
Topics will vary. Please see French department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 701. Topics in Cultural Studies. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see French department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 702. Topics in Popular Culture. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see French department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 703. Representing Paris. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 704. The French Atlantic. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
851. Dissertation Proposal. (M)
999. Independent Study. (C)
Designed to allow students to pursue a particular research topic under the close supervision of an
instructor.

Page 15 of 15

