GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION
(AS) {GAFL}
514. Encouraging Economic Growth. Online course fee of $150
This course is a hybrid and meets on-campus four times during the semester on the following Fridays
and Saturdays: Sep 11, 12; Oct 16, 17; Nov 13, 14; Dec 4, 5
524. Planning for Performance. (L) Bury, Betsy. Meets on campus 3 times per semester. On-campus
meetings are as follows for Summer 2015 11-week session: May 8-9, June 12-13,and July 10-11.
Online course fee of $150.
Students will learn the basics of strategic planning and performance management, the argument
made for and against using these tools in the public sector context, and, ultimately, to develop their
own philosophy about how to affect organizational change.
526. Municipal Bonds. (A) Steven Genyk.
The course provides a comprehensive overview of the $3.7 trillion municipal bond market, with a
focus on public finance investment banking; capital project financing for state and local governments
including water, sewer, mass transit and road projects, and non-profit financing for educational and
healthcare institutions; the legal and regulatory framework governing the municipal bonds market;
rating agency analysis; quantitative modeling; and investor perspectives.
529. Nonprofit Financial Management. (B) Rosenzweig, Janet.
The course is designed to provide the student with an understanding of the primary financial
management issues and decisions that confront senior management in nonprofits and government.
Students will examine financial analysis techniques from both a practical and strategic perspective as
they examine operating and capital decisions. The objective of the course is to allow the student to
understand how managers integrate the various discrete financial decisions within a broader
framework that allows them to analyze, develop and execute a coherent overall financial strategy.
SM 531. Data Science for Public Policy. (A) Nelson Lim.
534. Infrastructure Investment and Economic Growth: Why, How, and When. (B) Angelides.
Infrastructure is widely acknowledged to be critical for economic success, and infrastructure
investments are promoted as leading to economic growth, either at the local or national level. Yet,
investments in telecommunications, transportation, energy, or other infrastructure do not always yield
the hoped public benefit. This course will help answer the question: Under what circumstances does
infrastructure investment contribute to economic growth, and how do we know? Because government
resources are limited, advocates often mustbe creative to find sufficient funding to get desirable
projects completed. This course will also help answer the question: How do we pay for the
infrastructure projects we want to build? The course will illustrate approaches to answering these
questions using case studies of past and proposed investments.
542. (CPLN642) DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT. (A)

Page 1 of 10

GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION
(AS) {GAFL}
SM 546. Social Enterprise Models and Social Impact Locally and Globally. (B) Hansen-Turton,
Tine; Torres, Nicholas.
If you believe in finding innovative ways to make a difference and solve social issues locally and
globally, you you will benefit from the Social Enterprise and Impact Locally and Globally Course
(Social Enterprise). Social Enterprise Enterprise is designed for those who have a practitioner's
interest in the development, leadership, and management of the evolving nonprofit sector and their
intersection with the socially conscious private sector and government. The course takes the student
through the process of developing a mock social enterprise including idea exploration, testing and
plan execution and provides the student with essential strategies and tools to conduct in-depth
analysis of a social enterprise leading to their application to a regional social enterprise.
This course fulfills an elective for the MPA and the Certificate in Nonprofit Administration.
548. Grant Writing. Colleen Terrell. In Summer 2016 ONLY This is a "hybrid" course, with
synchronous, online meetings and once-monthly, on-campus meetings at the Fels Institute of
Government in Philadelphia, PA. On-campus meetings vary by term. Please read the description for
dates and times. Also, please note there is an additional $150 online course fee.
This course will provide students with the role of the foundation in philanthropy, what it does, how it
does it, and what you need to know to be both an effective foundation manager and foundation grant
seeker. From the foundation side, the course will include strategic planning, assessment of project
resultes, and the responsibilities of the foundation grant program officer. From the grant seeker side, it
will include identifying the appropriate foundations, making the connection to the foundation, grant
writing, and relationship management.
Summer 2016 On-Campus Meetings: 9:30am-1:00pm Fridays and Saturdays May 20-1, June 24-5,
and July 22-3
549. Leading Nonprofits.
This course will provide an analysis of the nonprofit sector in relation to public and for-profit
organizations, focusing on building the six core organizational compentencies that are essential to a
successful nonprofit.
SM 555. (DYNM655) Using the Political Process to Effect Organizational Change. (B)
Prerequisite(s): Course permits must be requested at https://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/graduate/
dynamics/course-permit. For additional information, please see our website at: http://
www.organizationaldynamics.upenn.edu
599. INDEPENDENT STUDY.
640. Program Evaluations and Data Analysis. (B) Lim, Nelson. This course is a requirement for
MPA full-time students who started in Fall 2015 or later. It is an elective for MPA full-time students who
started Fall 2014 or earlier.
714. ENCOURAGING ECON GROWTH.

Page 2 of 10

GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION
(AS) {GAFL}
733. Public Management (MPA Executive Section). (B) Jones, Darrell D.. This is a "hybrid" course,
with synchronous, online meetings and once-monthly, on-campus meetings at the Fels Institute of
Government in Philadelphia, PA. On-campus meetings vary by term. Please read the description for
dates and times. Also, please note there is an additional $150 online course fee.
Overview--Public managers must have technical expertise in planning, staffing, and budgeting;
however, technical skills alone are not sufficient to become an effective public manager. You must
understand the socio-political context of your organization and your success will be dependent on
your ability to analyze policy options and persuade stakeholders and supervisors, through effective
communications, to pursue the policy options you recommend. Public managers in the 21st century
must also understand the ever increasing diversity of their constituents and stakeholders. Economic
globalization and international migration continue to increase the the racial and ethnic diversity of our
workforce. Diversity begets complexity and tension. Effective public managers must learn to lead
inclusive organizations that leverage diversity and defuse tensions among heterogeneous
constituents and stakeholders. Learning objectives The goal for this class is to expand your
knowledge about public management, both as a profession and as a field of study.
At the end of this course, you will understand key competencies of an effective public manager,
demonstrate your understanding through class discussions, weekly reading notes, a group case study
analysis and presentation, and a policy memo that analyzes management dilemmas and proposes
responses. To accomplish this goal, we will go beyond passive learning from classroom lectures. We
will have a few guest speakers whose expertise will complement readings. We expect you to be
prepared and to participate in classroom discussions, engage practicing public administrators and
accomplished researchers in seminars/workshops, and learn to draft policy briefs and policy memos
completing scenario-based assignments.
On-campus meetings for Fall 2016 will be from 9:30am-1pm on Friday and Saturday on these
dates: September 9, 10; October 14, 15; November 18, 19; and December 2, 3.
SM 799. MPA Capstone. (C) Nelson Lim--MPA Full-Time Format; Claire Robertson-Kraft--MPA Exec
Format. This course has two parts--the seminar, which has a regularly scheduled meeting, and the
'independent study,' which does not have a meeting pattern but is a means of assigning a capstone
advisor individually to each enrolled student. Students taking the capstone should put in a request for
the seminar and the independent study placeholder. Individual independent study sections will be
assigned after the start of the term by the department. Any questions can be directed to Kathryn
Brossa at brossak@sas.upenn.edu NOTE: Capstone offered in the Summer term is a "hybrid" course.
The completion of a capstone projects is one of the academic requirements for the Master of Public
Administration (MPA) at the University of Pennsylvania's Fels Institute of Government. The capstone
project represents a way for graduate students to apply their multi-disciplinary learning from the
program to a specific public administration challenge(s) or issue(s). To succesfully complete a
capstone project, a student must receive a passing grade for his or her capstone paper and
associated briefing.
The student's capstone paper resembles a policy memo that an administrative staff writes to
decision makers and stakeholders. The paper integrates and deepens the student's learning from the
program. More importantly, the capstone paper provides a way for a student to bring her/his learning
and knoweldge from the program back into her/his chosen career. The research focus should be one
that is of great interest to the student as well as one from which a potential organization will benefit.
Summer 2016 On-Campus Meetings: 2:00pm-5:30pm Fridays and Saturdays May 20-1, June 24-5,
and July 22-3
This is a "hybrid" course, with synchronous, online meetings and once-monthly, on-campus
meetings at the Fels Institute of Government in Philadelphia, PA. On-campus meetings vary by term.
Please read the description for dates and times. Also, please note there is an additional $150 online
course fee.

Undergraduate Courses

Page 3 of 10

GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION
(AS) {GAFL}
612. Quantitative Methods for Policy Analysis. (B) Robertson-Kraft, Claire. This is a "hybrid"
course, with synchronous, online meetings and once-monthly, on-campus meetings at the Fels
Institute of Government in Philadelphia, PA. Weekends vary by term. Please read the course
description for further information.
This course will help students learn how to make evidence-based decisions in a public sector context.
The course will introduce important data analysis skills and help students evaluate the quality of
studies undertaken to measure the impact of public policies and programs.
On-campus meetings for Spring 2016 will be on Fridays from 9:30am-1pm on Jan. 15, Feb. 12, Mar.
18, and Apr. 15 and on Saturdays from 2-5:30pm on Jan 16, Feb. 13, Mar. 19, and Apr. 16. The class
will meet online weekly on Mondays 6-7pm.
SM 138. (PSCI138) Policymaking in the US. (M) Martinez.
This course is an oportunity for students to combine the major theoretical perspectives on the policy
process with the practical application to current policy issues. Students will gain theoretical tools to
explain policy change, a comprehensive understanding of the actors that influence policymaking and
politics, and experience writing policy documents. The course is designed to complement an
internship in the public policy arena, providing context and background that will enrich the internship
experience. The course can be taken either before or after completion of an internship.
641. Program Evaluations & Data Analysis--Hybrid Format. (L) John Roman. This is a "hybrid"
course, with synchronous, online meetings and once-monthly, on-campus meetings at the Fels
Institute of Government in Philadelphia, PA. On-campus meetings vary by term. Please read the
description for dates and times. Also, please note there is an additional $150 online course fee.
Summer 2016 On-Campus Meetings: 2:00pm-5:30pm Fridays and Saturdays May 20-1, June 24-5,
and July 22-3

Core Courses
589. Policy Development. (A) Martinez.
This course examines the policy development process including: the interaction of branches of
government; policy analysis; information; constituencies; and management of a policy development
office. The objective of this course is to provide an understanding of the development of government
policy, both at the macro level and from the viewpoint of persons who are in supporting roles to the
major actors in the process. The formula employed to achieve this objective consists of a combination
of readings, lectures, discussions, and activities that are designed to blend conceptual and practical
skills.
621. Public Economics. (A) Sieg, Holger Wolfgang.
This course provides students with the knowledge required to understand government operations in
relation to the market economy. In theory of supply and demand, students explore the pricing
mechanism, price elasticity, and the effects of price controls on markets. Efficiency is examined in
connection with competition and again in connection with equity, and market failure is considered as a
reason for government intervention. Cost-benefit analysis is examined in the context of selecting
among public investment alternatives. The course also assists students in addressing issues
connected with local public goods and economic development.

Page 4 of 10

GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION
(AS) {GAFL}
631. Policy Making & Public Institutions. (B) Meredith, Marc. This course is a core requirement for
the full-time MPA program at the Fels Institute of Goverment. Permits will not be issued to non-Fels
students.
This course introduces students to the theories and practice of the policy- making process. There are
four primary learning objectives. First, understanding how the structure of political institutions matter
for the policies that they produce. Second, recognizing the constraints that policy makers face when
making decisions on behalf of the public. Third, identifying the strategies that can be used to
overcome these constraints. Fourth, knowing the toolbox that is available to participants in the policymaking process to help get their preferred strategies implemented. While our focus will primarily be on
American political institutions, many of the idas and topics discussed in the class apply broadly to
other democratic systems of goverment. The class will be a mix of lecture and cases. Cases are on a
diverse set of policy topics, with a goal of illustrating braod themes about the policy-making process
rather than the specifics of certain policy areas.
703. (CRIM535) Statistics for Public Leadership. (A) Owens/Perrins.
This course presents students with statistical tools for government and public policy evaluation. The
foundations of statistical description and inference are emphasized, and the course builds the skills
students need to become critical consumers of statisical information. An integrated laboratory
component provides training in the use of general statistical software.
SM 732. Public Management. (D) DiIulio/Mulhern.
This core MPA course is intended to help each student to learn more than he or she already knows
about public management both as a profession and as a field of academic study and to enjoy the
company of supportive peers, instructors, and special guests as he or she contemplates a post-MPA
career in governance.
This course satisfies a core requirement in the Master of Public Administration full-time program.
735. Performance Management. (D) Botwinik/Golda.
How can leaders manage performance and make decisions that lead to desired outcomes such as
less crime, better education, or lower unit costs? This course examines the various ways that public
sector organizations can use data to plan strategically, manage risk, and monitor performance.
Students will learn about the theory behind performance measurement and risk management, as well
as the benefits, challenges, and limitations of performance management.

Representative Electives
SM 517. Quantitative Tools for Consulting. Lee Young Huang.
The purpose of the course is to study the theory and application of certain, key quantitative methods
utilized in financial and fiscal decision-making in state and local governments: defining and measuring
efficiency and equity; statistical analysis, multivariate analysis, linear and multipole regression; intertemporal decision-making; and cost-benefit analysis. Primary emphasis will be on understanding the
context and quantitative basics of these methods to prepare students for effective careers in state and
local governments. Each student should have a basic understanding of market economics, the roles
of government in our market economy, accounting/budgeting basics, and the Philadelphia metro area
economy and government.

Page 5 of 10

GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION
(AS) {GAFL}
502. Public Communications. (C) Benedict (Fall & Spring); Besnoff (Summer). This course has
seats reserved for Fels' students and gives priority to grad students. Post-bacc students, contact
Kathryn Brossa (brossak@sas.upenn.edu)
Successful leaders must be able to convey their integrity and their ideas, their vision and their values
clearly and convincingly in public settings. By analyzing great political speeches and affording
students the opportunity to prepare and deliver different types of speeches, this course teaches the
fundamentals of persuasive public speaking while encouraging students to develop their own voice.
This is a performance course. Students will gain skill and confidence in their speech writing and public
speaking skills through practice, peer feedback, and extensive professional coaching. Class lectures
and discussions will focus on persuasive stragegies and techniques for handling community
meetings, Q and A sessions, and interactions with the media.
503. Speech Writing. (B) Benedict.
Leaders need to know how to express themselves with clarity and conviction--in a meeting with five
people or in a public forum with five hundred. Whether you're writing for yourself or someone else, this
course will provide the basics of speech writing and give you the opportunity to write, revise and
deliver a variety of different speeches. You will also be given the opportunity to answer audience
questions after your speeches. The emphasis will be on preparing and giving longer speeches where
a prepared text or speaking notes would be advisable. In this performance course, you will examine
and learn from great speeches--from the classics down to the present. Your speeches will be
videotaped and you will receive feedback from both the instructor as well as your peers.
515. Public Finance Investment Banking. (B) Matteo.
This course examines the field of public finance in theory and in practice. The purpose of the course
is to provide a detailed understanding of the many facets of and applications of finance in the public
sector with a focus on public finance investment banking. The course will provide students with a
broad-based and technical overview of public finance and municipal bonds as well as a thorough
understanding of the business of public finance.
520. Marketing & Fundraising for Non-Profit Organizations. (A) Hugg. This is a "hybrid" course,
with synchronous, online meetings and once-monthly, on-campus meetings at the Fels Institute of
Government in Philadelphia, PA. Weekends for Fall 2016 will be September 09,10; October 14,15;
November 18,19; and December 2,3. Meeting times for these weekends will be 2-5:30pm. N.B., there
is an additional $150 online-course fee.
Fundraising and marketing are complementary tools for building revenue streams and fulfilling the
program objectives of nearly every nonprofit organization. This course develops students' ability to
market a nonprofit to mission recipients and prospective donors and to solicit funds from individuals
and organizations.
Through lectures, readings, discussions, and assignments, students are actively engaged in
learning how to help an organization achieve its mission and objectives. This includes but is not
limited to the assessing an organization's marketing and fundraising capabilities; identifying,
segmenting,and creating relationships with target markets and donors; building infrastructure to
properly seek and steward gifts; using technology to fulfill marketing and fundraising objectives; and
focusing on fundraising and marketing methods such as social media, direct response, events, major
gifts, planned giving, and others.
This course emphasizes applications. Each student will complete a fundraising and/or marketing
plan for a specific organization of their choosing, the structure of which will be derived from the term's
assignments.

Page 6 of 10

GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION
(AS) {GAFL}
528. Marketing for Nonprofit Organizations. (A) Hugg.
This course provides students with the concepts and tools to help nonprofit and government
organizations market their programs and services. The course emphasizes applications, and students
will complete a marketing plan during the course for a nonprofit organization or government agency of
their choice. Students will learn how to conduct competitive analyses, benchmarking, market
segmentation and client needs; explore opportunities for social research on client needs; explore
opportunities for social entrepreneurship and product development; and design effective Web and
direct marketing tactics as part of an overall promotion and packaging strategy.
SM 530. (PSCI413) Evidence Based Policies of Economic and Political Development. (B)
532. Urban Government in Action. (A) Kenney.
This class explores how city administrators and legislatures have addressed the critical issues facing
urban America today, including fighting urban blight and transforming neighborhoods, public school
funding, public financing of sports stadiums, reducing the tax burden, public health issues like
smoking bans, legislative redistricting, crime and safety issues, campaign finance finance reform,
economic development issues like tax increment financing, race relations, welfare reform, public
transportation, and how to reverse job and population losses. The goal is to place in context the
various ways that elected officials approach complex issues, towards a more realistic understanding
of how to influence a proposal as it works its way through the process towards implementation.
642. (CPLN642) Downtown Development. (A) Levy.
The course will provide an overview of the changing role of downtowns and commercial centers, how
and why they have evolved, diversified and been redeveloped and who are the various public and
private actors that are helping them reposition themselves in a new regional and global context. There
will be a strong focus on implementation, on how things get done, on the role of business
improvement districts, not-for-profit development corporations and local government in the United
States, Canada and a few international cities.
551. (WSTD551) Lobbying. (M)
In a system of representative government, organizations and individuals with interests at stake often
seek the support of a governement relations professional. This course addresses government
relations from the varying perspectives of the current or aspiring professional, the client, and the
government official. It is designed to provide the students with an introduction to government affairs
and lobbying at the local, state, and federal levels of governement and to illustrate how lobbying and
the lobbyists shape and affect public policy. The course is not designed as a how-to in lobbying, but,
rather, it is designed to expose students to lobbying and, more importantly, the lobbying process. To
that end, students will draw on many disciplines, such as psychology, law, history, political science,
urban affairs, economics, foreign policy, domestic policy, and others, to understand the complex
mosaic of the lobbying and legislative processes.

Page 7 of 10

GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION
(AS) {GAFL}
561. Media Relations. (C) Frank Igwe. This is a "hybrid" course, with synchronous, online meetings
and once-monthly, on-campus meetings at the Fels Institute of Government in Philadelphia, PA. Oncampus meetings vary by term. Please read the description for dates and times. Also, please note
there is an additional $150 online course fee.
This course is designed to help you better understand the role and practice of media relations and
messaging in corporate, non-profit, and government organizations in this new media era. You will
learn how to research media and reporters, devleop messages, build strategic media plans, generate
media coverage, serve as spokespeople, handle crisis situations, and use new media strategies. You
will hear from public relations professionals on such topics as working with reporters, developing PR
campaigns, and creating effective web outreach programs. Class discussions, reading assignments,
research and writing projects, group projects, and case studies offer an engaging and interactive
learning environment to expand and apply your knowledge of media relations and messaging.
Summer 2016 On-Campus Meetings: 9:30am-1:00pm Fridays and Saturdays May 20-1, June 24-5,
and July 22-3
569. (CPLN625, URBS451) The Politics of Housing and Urban Development. (A) Kromer.
This course offers an exploration of how legislative action, government policymaking, and citizen
advocacy influence plans for the investment of public capital in distressed urban neighborhoods.
Course topics this semester will include an evaluation of the results of City of Philadelphia
development policies under the administration of Mayor Michael A. Nutter, an assessment of a largescale property acquisition and development strategy being implemented by the Philadelphia Housing
Authority in North Philadelphia, and a review of recent and current reinvestment plans for Camden's
waterfront and downtown-area neighborhoods.
651. Public Financial Management I & II: Budgeting & Accounting. (B) Olanipekun-Lewis,
Folasade & Alleva, Jennifer. This course has two units of 7 weeks each. Students must register for
both sections of the course.
This course will introduce students to the fundamentals of budgeting and accounting for government
and nonprofit managers. The course is divided into two units. The first unit covers budgeting concepts
and skills, culminating in a real-world budgeting simulation. The second unit will cover basic
accounting principles and financial statement literacy, so that students are able to evaluate the fiscal
health of public sector organizations. The unit culminates with a final project requiring students to
analyze the City of Philadelphia's CAFR (Comprehensive Annual Financial Report).
The first unit runs from January 15 through February 26. The second unit runs from February 29
through April 27 with no class the week of March 9 in observance of Sprig break.
This course satisfies a core requirement in the Master of Public Administration, Certificate in Public
Finance, and Certificate in Economic Development and Growth.
652. Financial Management of Public and Nonprofit Organizations. (B) Cho, Michelle. This is a
"hybrid" course, with synchronous, online meetings and once-monthly, on-campus meetings at the
Fels Institute of Government in Philadelphia, PA. On-campus meetings vary by term. Please read the
description for dates and times. Also, please note there is an additional $150 online course fee.
This course provides students with a foundation in public and nonprofit financial management
vocabulary, analytic tools, and analysis placed within the context of decision challenges that confront
managers and leaders of public and nonprofit organizations. This is not an accounting course;
students will not be creating financial reports. Instead, the goal is to allow students to interpret,
understand, and effectively analyze financial information and reports used to make decisions in public
and nonprofit organizations. Ulitmately, the course attempts to allow the student to understand how
various discrete financial information and financial decisions are integrated within a broader
framework that is used to develop and execute a coherent financial strategy.
On-campus meetings for Spring 2016 are from 2:00pm-5:30pm on the following days: January 15,
16; February 12, 13; March 18, 19; and April 15,16.

Page 8 of 10

GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION
(AS) {GAFL}
710. Negotiations. (C) This is a "hybrid" course, with synchronous, online meetings and oncemonthly, on-campus meetings at the Fels Institute of Government in Philadelphia, PA. Weekends vary
by term. There is a $150 online course fee.
On-campus meetings for Fall 2015 will be held on Fridays and Saturdays, on the following dates: Sep
9, 10; Oct 14, 15; Nov 18, 19; Dec 2, 3. On these dates, the course will meet from 9:30am-1pm. The
course will meet synchronously, online every Tuesday night from 8-9pm.
727. Managing Public Funds: The Treasury Function. (A) Olanipekun-Lewis.
This course will focus on the theory and practic of managing public sector investment assets. The
course will examine cash management, pension fund management, project and construction fund
investment vehicles, longer-term asset management and other aspects of treasury management.
713. Entrepreneurship and Economic Development. (B) Thornburgh.
This course analyzes and challenges strategies for encouraging economic growth nationally and in
states and metropolitan areas, with the goal of helping students become effective practitioners of the
art. After reviewing key concepts and context, the course will ask students to evaluate and make
choices about economic strategies and investments in a political context.
SM 719. Advanced Budgeting. (A) Nadol and Westerman.
The course will build on the fundamentals taught in the introductory budgeting unit to help build
students' competence in budgetary analysis. Using detailed data from a major city as a course-long
case study, and incorporating excel skill-building exercises, students will develop hands-on
understanding of budgets by working through such factors as economic drivers of fiscal performance,
revenue analysis and forecasting, including tax policy considerations; expenditure analysis and
projection, with an emphasis on workforce costs; and capital budgeting and financing. Students will
also be introduced to key fiscal policies, budget monitoring and performance measurement, and the
development of effective budget communications for various audiences.
720. Critical Issues in Public Finance. (C) This is a "hybrid" course, with synchronous, online
meetings and once-monthly, on-campus meetings at the Fels Institute of Government in Philadelphia,
PA. On-campus meetings vary by term. Please read the description for dates and times. Also, please
note there is an additional $150 online course fee.
This course will consider contemporary issues affecting the fiscal state of local governments. Covered
will be issues that have distressed municipalities; the policies/initiatives that seek to rectify such,
including: privitazation/public private partnerships, reformation of municipal pensions, sustainable
education funding alternatives; and tax policies aimed at promoting economic growth. Students will be
assigned to a team, which will identify and provide a solution for an issue or issues plaguing a fictional
government. Each team will prepare a written report and make a presenation, all of which will
constitute the final project. Assignments will serve as the building blocks for the final written product
and presentation developed by each team.
The class if divided into four modules. The first module will take a historical look at events behind
fiscal distress in municipalities and then explore current day drivers that are causing the same today.
Modules two, three, and four will examine some of the tools that have been used successfully, or
otherwise, to remediate the drivers of fiscal distress. In each module, case studies will be used to
further analyze the particular fiscal challenge of a municipality. Written assignments will be based on
case studies.
On-campus meetings for Spring 2016 will be from 2-5:30pm on Friday and Saturday on these
dates: January 15, 16; February 12, 13; March 18, 19; and April 15, 16. The course will meet in DRL
3W2.

Page 9 of 10

GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION
(AS) {GAFL}
761. Lobbying. (A) Weinberg and Nixon.
In a system of representative government, organizations and individuals with interests at stake often
seek the support of a government relations professional.This course addresses government relations
from the varying perspectives of the current or aspiring professional, the client, and the government
official. It is designed to provide the students with an introduction to government affairs and lobbying
at the local, state and federal levels of government and to illustrate how lobbying and the lobbyists
shape and affect public policy. The course is not designed as ahow to in lobby ing, but rather it is
designed to expose students to lobbying and more importantly, the lobbying process. To that end,
students will draw on many disciplines such as psychology, law, history, political science, urban
affairs, economics, foreign policy, domestic policy and others, to understand the complex mosaic of
the lobbying and legislative process.
792. Contracting for Public Services. (B) Nadol and Neiderman.
This course examines how different strategies of ownership affect the performance of programs. This
course explores the different forms of privatization, including asset sales, deregulation, and public
sector contracting; ownership and managerial behavior; state-owned enterprises and mixedownership enterprises; US and overseas experience; and techniques and politics of privatization.

Page 10 of 10

