GENOMICS AND COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY
(MD) {GCB}
SM 493. (BIOL493) EPIGEN OF HEALTH&DISEASE.
534. (PHRM534) Experimental Genome Science. C Brown, J Murray.Prerequisite(s):
Undergraduates and Masters students need BIOL431 or equivalent.
535. (CIS 535, MTR 535) Introduction to Bioinformatics. (B) B Voight.Prerequisite(s): The course
will assume a solid knowledge of modern biology. An advanced undergraduate course such as
BIOL421 or a graduate course in biology such as BIOL526 (Experimental Principles in Cell and
Molecular Biology), BIOL527 (Advanced Molecular Biology and Genetics), BIOL528 (Advanced
Molecular Genetics), BIOL540 (Genetic Systems, or equivalent, is a prerequisite. Corequisite(s):
Registration for GCB 535-402 (Laboratory) is required. All students are required to bring a laptop to
the lab sessions (Fridays). TAs will provide help with the material, but students should be computercapable with their own laptop, and should be willing/capable to download and install free software
from the internet.
This course provides broad overview of bioinformatics and computational biology as applied to
biomedical research. A primary objective of this course is to enable students to integrate modern
bioinformatics tools into their research activities. Course material is aimed to address biological
questions using computational approaches and the analysis of data. Areas include DNA sequence
alignment, genetic variation and analysis, motif discovery, study design for high-throughput
sequencing, RNA and gene expression, single gene and whole-genome analysis, and topics in
systems biology. The relevant principles underlying methods used for analysis in these areas will be
introduced and discussed at a level appropriate for biologists without a background in computer
science. However, a basic primer in programming and operating in a UNIX environment will be
presented.
This course emphasizes direct, hands-on experience with applications to current biological
research problems. The course is not intended for computer science students who want to learn
about biologically motivaetd algorithmic problems; BIOL437/GCB 536 and GCB/CIS/BIOL537 are
more appropriate.
536. (BIOL437) Computational Biology. (M)
An introductory computational biology course designed for computational scientists. The course will
cover fundamentals of algorithms, statistics, and mathematics as applied to biological problems. In
particular, emphasis will be given to biological problem modeling. Students will be expected to learn
the basic algorithms underlying computational biology, basi c mathematical / statistical proofs and
molecular biology. Topics to be cover ed are genome annotation and string algorithms, pattern search
and statistical learning, molecular evolution and phylogenetics and small molecule folding.
SM 537. (BIOL537, CIS 635) Advanced Computational Biology. (B) Y Barash, L
Wang.Prerequisite(s): GCB536 or equivalent.
567. (BE 567) Modeling Biol Systems.
585. (BMB 585) Wistar Inst Cancer Biol.
SM 752. (CAMB752) Genomics. (B) S Diskin.

Page 1 of 1

