GREEK
(AS) {GREK}

298. STUDY ABROAD.
SM 603. GREEK SEMINAR.
015. Elementary Modern Greek I. (M) Staff. Offered through Penn Language Center.
This course is designed for students with no prior knowledge of the modern Greek Language.
Instructions are theme based and is supported by a Textbook as well as other written or audiovisual
material. It provides the framework for development of all communicative skills (reading, writing,
comprehension and speaking) at a basic level. The course also introduces students to aspects of
Modern Greek culture that are close to students' own horizon, while it exposes them to academic
presentations of Greek history, arts, and current affairs. Quizzes, finals and short individual work with
presentation are the testing tools. The completion of this unit does NOT satisfy the language
requirement.
016. Elementary Modern Greek II. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): GREK 015 or equivalent. Offered
through Penn Language Center . this section is reserved for heritage learners or by permission of
instructor.
Continuation of Elementary Modern Greek I, with increased emphasis on reading and writing.
017. Intermediate Modern Greek I. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): GREK 015 and 016 or equivalent.
Offered through Penn Language Center.
This course is designed for students with an elementary knowledge of Demotic Modern Greek, and
aims mainly at developing oral expression, reading and writing skills.
018. Intermediate Modern Greek II. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): GREK 015, 016, and 017 or equivalent.
Offered through Penn Language Center .
Further attention to developing oral expression, reading, and writing skills for students with knowledge
of Demotic Modern Greek.
SM 101. Elementary Classical Greek I. (A) Staff.
Intensive introduction to Classical Greek morphology and syntax. This course includes exercises in
grammar, Greek composition, and translation from Greek to English. Emphasis is placed upon
developing the ability to read Greek with facility.
SM 102. Elementary Classical Greek II. (B) Nishimura-Jensen.Prerequisite(s): GREK 101 or
equivalent.
Students complete their study of the morphology and syntax of Classical Greek. We begin the
semester with continuing exercises in grammar and translation, then gradually shift emphasis to
reading unadapted Greek texts.
SM 112. Intensive Elementary Classical Greek. (L)
An introduction to the ancient Greek language for beginners, with explanation of basic grammatical
concepts and intensive exercises in reading and writing. Ideal for undergraduates or graduate students
from Penn or elsewhere with some background in learning other languages, or who need to learn
Greek rapidly. The course covers the first year of college-level Greek, equivalent to GREK 101 + 102
at more than twice the normal pace. For further information on Penn's Greek curriculum, visit the
Classical Studies department website.

Page 1 of 4

GREEK
(AS) {GREK}
115. Greek/Heritage Speakers I. (C) Tsekoura.
This course is intended to help Heritage Speakers or student with prior knowledge of conversational
modern Greek (or even Ancient Greek) to refresh or enrich their knowledge of modern Greek and who
would not be a good fit for the elementary or intermediate classes. A theme based textbook and
instructions along with a comprehensive overview of grammar as a whole is presented while original
text, songs, video and other media are used in order to augment vocabulary and increase fluency in
modern Greek. Students are expected to properly use the language, do theme-based research on the
themes examined and provide written work on various subjects and make conversation in class.
Presentations on researched topics account for final exam.
116. Greek/Heritage Speakers II. (B) Staff.
It is the continuation of GREK 115 with completing Grammar (passive voice as well as unusual nouns
and adjectives etc.,) and adding more challenging reading and writing material. The completion of this
course satisfies the language requirement. ALL students completing the HSI 115 are eligible to enroll.
ALL OTHERS will have to take a placement test.
SM 203. Intermediate Classical Greek: Prose. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Ancient Greek 102, Greek
112 or equivalent.
This course is for those who have completed Ancient Greek 102, Greek 112 or equivalent. You are
now ready to begin reading real Greek! We will read a selection of passages from Greek prose
authors, focusing on language and style.
SM 204. Intermediate Classical Greek: Poetry. (B) Glauthier.Prerequisite(s): GREK 203 or
equivalent.
This course introduces students to the Homeric dialect and the study of the Homeric poems and
archaic Greek world. We will spend most of the semester reading the Odyssey. For the last few weeks
of class, we will switch modes (and sometimes dialects) to read selections of archaic Greek lyric (e.g.
Archilochus, Mimnermus, Theognis, Sappho).
SM 212. Intensive Intermediate Greek. (M) Staff. Completion of this course fulfills the Penn language
requirement. For further information on Penn's Latin curriculum, including placement and language
requirement, visit the Classical Studies department website.
An introduction to the basic history and conventions of Greek prose and poetry, with continuous
readings from classical authors accompanied by grammar review and exercises. Ideal for
undergraduates or graduate students from Penn or elsewhere who have completed the equivalent of
one year Greek (e.g., GREK 112). The course covers the second year of college-level Greek,
equivalent to GREK 203 + 204 at more than twice the normal pace.
SM 503. Historical Grammar of Greek. (M) Ringe.Prerequisite(s): A fluent reading knowledge of
Greek.
Investigation of the grammar of Classical Greek from the viewpoint of historical linguistics. The course
will offer historical explanations for numerous structural peculiarities of the Greek language and
anomalies of Greek grammar, touch on the relationship of Greek with other languages, and
incidentally introduce the student to some basic concepts of language analysis likely to be useful in
teaching Greek and learning other languages.

Page 2 of 4

GREEK
(AS) {GREK}
SM 309. Advanced Greek: Ancient Vegetarianism. (M) Struck.Prerequisite(s): GREK 204.
The focus of this course will be Platos critiques of poetry, with particular emphasis on inspiration,
mimesis, aesthetic experience, the materiality of language, the social value of poetry, and the
relationship between poetry, philosophy, and other forms of discourse. Our primary Platonic texts will
be Ion (complete) and Republic (selections). Additional readings, in both Greek and English, will come
from poets (e.g. Hesiod, Aristophanes) and writers of various forms of prose (e.g. Gorgias, Aristotle,
Longinus). Secondary readings will inform class discussion, allow students to explore the origins and
development of ancient literary theory in greater depth, and as a basis for original research.
399. Supervised Study in Greek Literature. (C) Staff.
This course is taken by students doing independent work with a faculty advisor, such as students
approved to work on a senior research paper in pursuit of honors in the major.
SM 401. (CLST371) Greek for Advanced Students. (M) Staff.
For graduate students in other departments needing individualized study in Greek literature.
Spring 2013 Topic: The history of Western medicine is remarkably recent; until the nineteenth
century prevailing theories of the body and mind, and many therapeutic methods to combat disease,
were largely informed by an elaborate system developed centuries earlier in ancient Greece, at a
period when the lines between philosophy, medicine, and what we might consider magic, were much
less clearly defined than they are today. This course will examine the ways in which the Greeks, and
then the Romans, conceptualized the body, disease, and healing, and will compare these to medical
culture of our time. We will consider sources from Hippocrates, Plato, and Aristotle to Galen and
Soranus, and will juxtapose these writings with modern discourse about similar topics. We will also
pay some attention to ancient pharmacology and religious healing, and will visit the Penn Museum to
see their collection of ancient medical instruments. All readings will be in English and no previous
background in Classical Studies is required. This course will be especially appealing (and useful) to
Pre-med and Nursing students, and to students interested in the History of Science, Ancient
Philosophy, and Classics.
SM 540. The Greek Text: Language and Style. (M) Ker.
What do we need to read texts in ancient Greek? In this course we read just one prose text and one
poetic text, or a very limited number of texts and passages, with a focus on language and formal
analysis (such as diction, grammar, stylistics, metrics, rhetoric, textual criticism). A range of exercises
will be used to develop these skills, including composition, lexical studies, recitation, memorization,
exegesis, written close-readings, and sight-translation.
SM 541. Greek Literary History. (M) Struck.
We survey an extensive range of readings in a variety of authors in both prose and poetry and
consider the problems and opportunities for composing a literary history.
SM 600. (CLST600) Graduate Greek Seminar, Prose and Poetry.. (A) staff.
Topics will vary
Fall 2014 topic: Through close reading of selected books of the Iliad, we will consider the range of
approaches, from oral poetics to post-classical reception, that inform current interpretations of the
Homeric epics.
SM 601. (ANCH603) Graduate Greek Prose. (M) Wilson.
Topics will vary

Page 3 of 4

GREEK
(AS) {GREK}
SM 602. (COML606, ENGL705) Graduate Greek Poetry. (M) Ralph Rosen.
This advanced graduate seminar in Greek literature will focus in detail on several plays of
Aristophanes and selections from his contemporaries in Old Comedy, Cratinus and Eupolis. Special
attention will be paid both to questions of genre and comic dynamics, and to the historical and political
contexts in which these plays were first performed.'
SM 605. Historians. (M) Staff.
A study of Herodotus and/or other historians.
SM 607. Homeric Language. (M) Staff.
A close look at the artificial Homeric dialect from the point of view of historical linguistics. Some
reading of Homer will also be involved, but for the purpose of investigating the language, it will be
taken for granted that students can translate the text.
SM 608. Greek Dialects. (M) Ringe/Cardona.
A study of Greek dialects.
SM 611. (AAMW611, ANCH611, CLST611) Greek Epigraphy. (M) McInerney.
An introduction to the principles and practices of Greek Epigraphy. Study of selected Greek
inscriptions.
998. Supervised Reading. (C)
999. Independent Study. (C) Staff.
For doctoral candidates.

Page 4 of 4

