GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
003. Introduction to Sexuality Studies and Queer Theory. (A) Adley.
This course will examine major ideas in the field of queer studies. Relying upon theoretical, historical,
and cultural studies texts, we will consider the representation and constructions of sexuality-based
identities as they have been formed within the contemporary United States. We will explore the idea of
sexuality as a category of social identity, probing the identities of lesbian, gay, bisexual and
transgender to try and understand what they really mean in various cultural, social, and political
milieus. In doing so, we will ask: What does it mean to study queerness? What do we mean by "queer
studies"? How do institutions - religious, legal, scientific - shape our understandings of queer
identities? In what ways do sexuality and gender interact, and how does this interaction inform the
meanings of each of these identity categories? How do other social categories of identification - race,
ethnicity, class, etc. - affect the ways in which we understand expressions of queerness? What does
studying queerness tell us about the workings of contemporary political, cultural, and social life? What
is normal and who/what is it that defines and controls normalcy?
SM 040. (URBS050) Womanism and Identity Politics in the Realm of Hip-Hop. Patterson.
This course centers on the intersections of womanism, woman of color identity development, and
agency within hip-hop culture. We will touch on several topics that uncover the condition of minoritized
women in hip-hop media, including creating/owning space, lyrical assault, defining womanhood,
sexuality, and fetishes. In exploring music, literature, advertisements, film, and television, we will
discuss the ways women of color construct understandings of self, while navigating and reimagining
reality within hip-hop contexts.
L/R 102. (CINE112, COML245, ENGL102, PSYS102) Study of a Literary Theme. (C) Arts & Letters
Sector. All Classes. Staff.
The primary for this course is the English Department. When the course content includes gender,
sexuality and women's studies it will be cross-listed with GSWS. See additional information and
description on the English Department's website: https://www.english.upenn.edu
115. (RUSS115) 19TH C TRANSGENDER LIT.
This course provides a literary and cultural prehistory to contemporary discourses on transgender
identity by focusing on the figure of the hermaphrodite in 19th Russia and the West. Far from a
marginal subject, the hermaphrodite and intersex characters played central roles in the novels of
Balzac, Tolstoy, Dostoevsky, and many others whose work we will read in this course. Interdisciplinary
in nature, this course draws on 19th century discourses in medicine, psychology, opera, religious
philosophy, and political theory to understand why characters who exist outside of the male/female
gender binary feature so prominently in 19th century literature and cultural texts across a wide range
of traditions (Anglophone, French, and Russian, and others).
128. (COML128, ENGL103) The Diary. (A) Staff.
Diary writing is an intimate mode of expression in which individuals seek to find meaning in their
personal lives and relations, responding to the external realities in which they live. Their coping is
subjected to their historical,educational and social contexts, and to the generic conventions of diary
writing. This course examines the diary as a genre, exploring its functions, meanings, forms and
conventions, comparing it with fictive and non-fictive autobiographical writings such as the diary novel,
autobiography and the memoir, as well as comparative gender diary-writing.

Page 1 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
SM 135. (ENGL135) Creative Non-Fiction Writing. Staff.
A workshop course in the writing of expository prose. Assignments include informal as well as formal
essays, covering such topics as autobiography, family history, review, interview, analysis of advertising
and popular culture, travel, work, and satire.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a description of the current
offerings
SM 145. (ENGL145) Advanced Non-Fiction Writing. (C) This course is not open to freshmen.
Students wishing to take this course must submit a writing sample a part of the selection process. May
be repeated for credit with a different instructor.
Writing with a view to publication in the freelance sections of newspapers such as THE
PHILADELPHIA INQUIRER and THE NEW YORK TIMES, in magazines such as THE ATLANTIC and
THE NEW YORKER, and in the literary quarterlies and the journals of opinion. Among the areas likely
to be considered are writing as a public act, issues of taste and of privacy, questions of ethics and of
policy, methods of research and of checking, excerpting, marketing, and the realistic understanding of
assignments and of the publishing world. Student papers will be the basis of weekly editorial sessions,
with concentration on the language: how to render material literate, how to recognize and dispose of
padding and self-indulgence, how to tighten structure and amplify substance.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a description of the current
offerings
SM 150. (AFRC153, ANTH150) Black Queer Studies: A Diasporic Approach. (M) Staff.
This interdisciplinary course explores over two decades of work produced by and about black queer
subjects throughout the circum-Atlantic world. While providing an introduction to various artists and
intellectuals of the black queer diaspora, this seminar examines the distinct socio-cultural, historical
and geographical contexts in which "black queerness" as a concept is embraced or contested. We will
interrogate the transnational and transcultural mobility of specific aesthetics as well as racial and
sexual identity categories more broadly using ethnography, poetry, painting, film, photography and
literature. Our aim is to use the prism of artistry to highlight the dynamic relationship between African
Diaspora Studies and Queer Studies.
SM 212. (ANCH212, CLST213) Women in Imperial Rome. (C) Gillespie.
Livia, the first empress of Rome, is a critical figure for our understanding of Roman women at the
transitional moment between Republic and Empire. As the most publicly celebrated woman of
Augustus' household, Livia is an opportune figure through which to examine a variety of Augustan and
early imperial texts and monuments.
This course will survey Livia's different literary and material representationsand attempt to come to
terms with the various perspectives on the first empress presented by these texts and contexts. Livia
provides a key figure through whom students will be exposed to various issues surrounding the
portrayal of Roman women in the early empire. Through lecture and discussion, we will relate Livia to
her contemporary world, and then examine the role of imperial women through the rest of the JulioClaudian era and beyond. We will discover Livia's influence in creating the role of the empress, and
analyze the differences between her representation as an ideal and that of later imperial women.
Students will write brief response papers to primary texts and present on select secondary readings
that add to our understanding of the portrayal of Livia and imperial women more generally.

Page 2 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
216. (HSOC216) Gender and Health. (M) Staff.
This course explores the ways in which the production of medical knowledge, the provision of health
care, and the experiences of health, illness, and bodily changes are gendered and will consider how
and why they are gendered in different ways in different parts of the world. The course begins with an
introduction to relevant theoretical materials from feminist studies, anthropology, sociology and political
economy, on sexuality, the body, and reproduction. Students will then read ethnographic material that
analyzes experiences such as sexual maturation, reproduction, eating disorders, aging, and sex work as well as ordinary encounters with medical systems - as experienced through and with the gendered
body in a variety of contexts around the world. Students will have the chance to conduct ethnographic
interviews, and will write final research papers that integrate this ethnographic material, along with
library material, in the study of a particular gendered medical experience in the U.S. or another region
of the world. Note: both men's and women's health issues will be addressed.
SM 217. (SAST217) CU In India - Topics Course. (E) Staff.
C.U. in India is a hybrid, domestic/overseas course series which provides students with the opportunity
to have an applied learning and cultural experience in India. The 2-CU course requires: 1) 15
classroom hours at Penn in the Fall term 2) A 12-Day trip to India with the instructor during the winter
break to visit key sites and conduct original research (sites vary) 3) 15 classroom hours at Penn in the
Spring term and 4) A research paper, due at the end of the spring term. Course enrollment is
restricted to students admitted to the program. For more information, and the program application, go
to http://sites.sas.upenn.edu/cuinindia
SM 230. (HIST230) Topics in European History. (C) Staff. Topics in European History
Topics vary
SM 244. (ANTH243, HSOC289) Critical Methods in Sexuality Studies. (C) Staff.
How do we read, record, and write histories and practices of sexual difference --in the archives, on
Tumblr, or in a dyke bar? This seminar examines the links between queer politics and method. We will
ask how differences in sexuality are understood and described in sexuality studies, anthropology,
literature, and cultural texts. We will also consider counter archives, ephemeral objects, live
performance, and subcultural scenes in the making of queer knowledge. How might emphasizing
practices, not identities, modify our understanding of representation, evidence, and interpretation? In
our search for unrecognized and intangible modes of evidence, we will necessarily ask what a body
and its difference might be beyond easily legible forms of subjectivity. We will also experiment with
video, blogging, co-teaching and diverse forms of research and writing.
SM 254. (EALC255, EALC655, GSWS654, THAR485) Japanese Theater. (C) Kano.
Japan has one of the richest and most varied theatrical traditions in the world. In this course, we will
examine Japanese theater in historical and comparative contexts. The readings and discussions will
cover all areas of the theatrical experience (script, acting, stage design, costumes, music, audience).
Audio-visual material will be used whenever appropriate and possible. The class will be conducted in
English, with all English materials.
SM 269. (ENGL259) Topics In Modernism. (M) Staff.
This course explores an aspect of literary modernism intensively; specific course topics will vary from
year to year. Past offerings have included seminars on the avant-garde, on the politics of modernism,
and on its role in shaping poetry, music, and the visual arts.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a description of the current
offerings.

Page 3 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
SM 292. (CINE202, COML292, ENGL292) TOPICS FILM STUDIES. (M)
SM 313. (ARTH313, EALC353) Topics in East Asian Art.
Topic varies.
L/R 294. (ARTH294, ARTH694, VLST236) Art Now. (M) Silverman, K..
One of the most striking features of today's art world is the conspicuous place occupied in it by the
photographic image. Large-scale color photographs and time-based installations in projections are
everywhere. Looking back, we can see that much of the art making of the past 60 years has also been
defined by this medium, regardless of the form it takes. Photographic images have inspired countless
paintings, appeared in combines and installations, morphed into sculptures, drawings and
performances, and served both as the object and the vehicle of institutional critique. They are also an
increasinglyimportant exhibition site: where most of us go to see earthworks, happenings and bodyart. This course is a three-part exploration of our photographic present.
This course will be a three-part exploration of our photographic present. In the first part, we will look
at the role played by the photographic image in the post World War II "return to the world. In the
second part, we will examine the suspicion under which this image falls in teh 1970's and 1980's, and
the derealization to which it is subjected. In the third part, we will focus on artists who adopt a very
different relationship to photography: who see it as a "trace," instead of a representation, and use it to
mourn what is gone, remember what has been forgotten or repressed, and reorient themselves to
others and the world.
SM 296. (COML291, ENGL294) Topics In Literary Theory. Staff.
This course explores an aspect of literary theory intensively; specific course topics vary from year to
year. It is an English course that is cross-listed with GSWS when the topic includes gender, sexuality
and women's studies. Please check out the English Department's website for the current semester's
description.
SM 301. (ARTH301, CINE301, FREN301) FRENCH IDENTITY. (C)
SM 322. (CINE322, COML322, SOCI322) Advanced Topics in Global Gender and Sexuality
Studies. (A) Staff.
How do sex and gender become sites of cultural production, identity-formation, and contentious
politics? This seminar engages these questions in the context of the "Middle East" as a constructed
geopolitical space for imperial politics and political intervention. The class is divided into three units. In
the first unit, we engage feminist and queer theories to discuss the shifting meanings of "sex" and
"gender" in transnational and postcolonial contexts. In the second unit we explore the contextual and
shifting notions of "private" and "public" as they have been elaborated in political theory, feminist
theory, and media studies. We also consider how different media technologies enable and constrain
the performance and expression of gender and sexual identities. In the last unit, we examine the
material and symbolic construction of sex and gender in the shadow of Orientalism, the War on Terror,
Multiculturalism, and the recent Arab uprisings. In this unit, we consider how geopolitics are refracted
in public controversies around issues like gay rights, female genital mutilation, the veil, and honor
killing.

Page 4 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
SM 326. (AFRC326, CINE326, GSWS526) Theories in Gender and Sexuality Studies. (A)
Keirbeck.Prerequisite(s): A prior course in gender, sexuality and women's studies.
What are queer cultural experiences and values? Many academics and social movements have noted
that the radical aspirations of queer theory and activism not only disrupt but also shore up neoliberal
ideologies. In this course students will explore the historical and co-emergence of queer cultures and
neoliberalism by examining the promises and pitfalls of queer politics over the past quarter century.
The coining of "queer theory" by Theresa de Lauretis in 1990 was intended as a disruptive joke. Its
provocation resided in joining "queer," an appropriation of street slang bandied about among New York
City activists and artists in the 1980s, to "theory," the passport of priviledge in academic life. The
irreverence of her joke exemplifies a central ethic of queer experience that renders palpable the
tensions between margins and centers. The course will traverse scholarship from economic and queer
anthropology, history, sociology & science studies, philosophy, political theory and literary studies.
This wide survey of literature will allow students to develop an understanding of the political and
economic processes that have conditioned the emergence of queerness as a diverse range of ethical
commitments in particular sociocultural contexts globally. Students will investigate the affective
dimensions of the emergence of queer theory, studies and activism within the United States and
elsewhere in the context of global neoliberal social reforms. The course is split into four units: 1) In the
Place of Queer Origins; 2) Queer Values; 3) Queer Circulations and Subjectivities; and 4) Queer
Temporalities.
SM 328. (CINE328, ENGL290, THAR275) Feminist & Queer Aesthetics: Art, Theater, Film, and
Visual Culture. (C) Staff.
In 1971 Linda Nochlin provocatively inquired, "Why have there been no great women artists?" Her
polemic ignited new waves of knowledge production about the world making possibilities of female,
feminist and "outsider" art. This seminar considers art at the margins and how it reimagines the visual
to perform a rebuttal to male dominated art are scenes, heteronormative aesthetics, and racist art
markets. Working at the intersection of queer studies, feminist art historical practice, theater, and
cinema studies, we will interrogate the aesthetics of indentity politics. How does feminist art compel
new directions in the way we conceive of labor, value, process, and circulation? How do art practices
contest and rewrite normative meanings of bodily and sexual difference? Our class privileges art as a
transformative mode of language and critique as we bridge visual culture and scholarship to create
multiple lenses of analysis.
We will consider diverse genres, for example, body art, photography, film, process art, literature and
epistolary forms. We will examine how amateurism, deskilling, display, and objectification become
strategic performances of feminist and queer identities and political refusal. Configurations of
community, such as appropriation, co-optation, "selling out," and safe space will be interrogated.
Finally, we will look at the "Occupy Museum" movement to think about the institutionalization of
marginalized art forms and makers.
SM 391. (SPAN390) INTRO SPAN AMER LIT. (M)
SM 333. (HSOC334) Birth Culture & Medical Technology. (M) Mackenzie.
How we are born and give birth can vary more than most people realize. Until the rise of medical
technology, women gave birth at home surrounded by other women. Now, the majority of Americans
are born in hospitals, and a large percentage of those birth are the result of surgical interventions. This
course will explore the medicalization of birth, as well as the movements dedicated to promoting home
birth, natural birth, and midwifery. Many of the readings will examine birth from an unapologetically
feminist and/or holistic perspective, and we will discuss the psychological, political, cultural and
spiritual dimensions of birth practices. We will also consider the impact of increasingly sophisticated
medical technology on conception and pregnancy, including in vitro fertilization, surrogate mothers,
and extending the childbearing years well into late life. An important theme throughout will be the
concept of "appropriate technology" -- which technologies are appropriate and who decides?
Readings will be drawn from a number of sources, principally midwifery, nursing, and medical journals.

Page 5 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
SM 353. (ENGL353) Topics In 19th-Century American Literature. (M) Staff.
The primary for this course is the English Department. When the course content includes gender,
sexuality and women's studies it will be cross-listed with GSWS. See additional information and
description on the English Department's website: https://www.english.upenn.edu
SM 369. (ANTH369, ENGL369, PSYS369) TOPICS POETRY & POETICS. (M)
SM 397. (LALS398, SPAN397) History of Spanish American Culture. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s):
Spanish 219.
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website descriptions for a description of the current
offerings. http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/roml/spanish/undergraduate/courses.html
423. Gendered Constructions of Other Cultures in Western Travel Literature. Rabberman.
Descriptions of peoples from foreign lands and faraway places have captured theimaginations of
Europeans for centuries. Pilgrims and merchants, explorers and conquistadores, Victorians taking their
Grand Tour and 21st century travelers have preserved their observations, both in written form, in
ethnographies and diaries, novels and travel narratives, and in visual form, in maps, illuminated
manuscripts, engravings, and photographs. Through these media, these travelers have not simply
captured their memories, but have also helped to shape Western representations of the people they
encountered. In the process, these travelers often have justified Western political, economic, cultural,
and social dominance, although instead some travelers have critiqued the West. And in all these
depictions, gender and sexuality have played centrol roles in the creation of these identities and
relationship.
SM 434. (ANTH434) The Politics of Ugly. (M) Carelock.
Venus was the God of Beauty and Love yet she was married to Hephaestus, the mangled, grumpy and
for all intents and purposes, ugly god. Why juxtapose such distinct figures? Are they doing the same
job? The course discusses the interplay between ugliness and politics with focus on a number of
central concepts such as race, social conflict, nationalism, ideology, dictatorship, propaganda and
autonomy. Emphasis is put on the double role of the deployment of ugliness, as reinforcement of
ideological and political ideas and as a force of social criticism. How does the state justify its own
existence by the use of aesthetic narratives? How does the State identify undesirables? This class
highlights how groups who feel somatically alike behave, and how their boundaries form and change
over time. The focus will be interdisciplinary and multi-national, with case studies from past and
present. The class will have a digital media focus as we will delve into issues of representation
particularly with respect to race. For example, we will delve into the aesthetic discussion of northern
and southern Sudanese as well and Hitler's Germany.
475. (THAR475) ADVD TPCS IN PERFORMANCE. (M)

Page 6 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
SM 485. (PHIL485) Topics in Gender Theory. (M) Staff.
This course seeks to assemble some of the philosophical evidence for feminist claims that traditional
political theories are fundamentlaly inadequate because they have not, and presumably cannot, deal
with basic facts of gender and the oppression of Women. We will begin by examining the nature of the
distinction between sex and gender. This will take us through discussions of: the meaning and
significance of categories being socially constructed, the possibility that sexual differences (and
inequalities) are in some sense natural and what normative force this has. We will then consider
varous attempts to describe the nature of women's oppression. What is it? How does it manifest itself
in the lives of women? This will take us through discussions of freedom, constrained choice, ideology,
"consciousness raising", androcentrism and the relation between, and methodological importance of,
ideal and non-ideal theory. Along the way we will be constructing a version of the feminist framework
known as the dominance approach and seeing how it analyzes three presumed sites of oppression:
sexuality, reproduction and work/family. Among the authors we will be reading are: Elizabeth
Anderson, Marily Frye, Sally Haslanger, Rae Langton, Anthony Laden, Catherine MacKinnon, and
Susan Okin.
The prerequisite for UNDERGRADUATES taking this course is: two philosophy courses (ONE of
which is in moral or political philosophy) OR ONE of the following Gender Studies courses: GSWS/
PHIL 028, GSWS/PoliSci 280, GSWS 320. There will be one short paper (6-8 pages) with revision, a
longer final paper (15 pages) and weekly one-page reflections on a topic from the previous week's
discussion.
SM 524. (COML522, ENGL525) CHAUCER. (M) Staff.
An advanced introduction to Chaucer's poetry and Chaucer criticism. Reading and discussion of the
dream visions, Troilus and Criseyde, and selections from Canterbury Tales, from the viewpoint of
Chaucer's development as a narrative artist.
SM 488. (AFRC488, ANTH488, SOCI488) Topics: Culture, Sexuality and Global Health. (A)
Fiereck.
What does it mean to claim that "Homosexuality is un-African"? This course explores the linked
histories of race, nation, gender and sexuality in Africa that such an ideological claim invokes, yet
effaces. The polemics that produce statements like this play out through the disciplinary tensions that
exist between African and sexuality/queer studies. These tensions have as much to do with the role
played by the relation between sexuality and race within cultures of European colonization, as they
have with the role of gender and sexuality within postcolonial power relations in Africa. Such
antagonisms are sustained through the marginalization of gender and sexuality perspectives within
postcolonial scholarship on Africa, as well as the bracketing of African perspectives in queer and
feminist studies. This course will deconstruct these impasses by exploring scholarship at the margins
of each area of study. Students will be encouraged to ask questions about how issues of race,
ethnicity, nation, gender and sexuality are produced as suppressed presences in a range of texts, films
and other materials.
The course will include readings from postcolonial, gender, sexuality and African studies,
anthropology, history, literary studies and Marxism, giving students a grounding in historical and
contemporary perspectives at the intersection of African, queer and feminist studies.
SM 509. (COML509, ENGL591, GRMN509, JWST509, YDSH509) TOPICS IN YIDDISH LIT. (M)
) "Jewish Women Writers" is a graduate seminar also open to advanced undergradu The seminar will
consider works by Jewish women who wrote in Yiddish, Hebrew, Ee

Page 7 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
SM 517. (SOCI517) WORK AND IDENTITY. (M) Jacobs, Leidner.
The thinkers whose work formed the foundations of sociological theory considered the nature of the
relationship between work and identity key to understanding social solidarity, power, and historical
change. In recent years, the division of labor, structures of work, and employment relations have all
been undergoing rapid change, necessarily affecting the possibilities for constructing identity through
work. This seminar examines how changes in the nature and organization of work have reshaped the
relationshop between work and identity.
SM 525. (GRMN526) The Trouble with Freud: Psychoanalysis, Literature, Culture. (C) Weissberg.
For professionals in the field of mental care, Freud's work is often regarded as outmoded, if not
problematic psychologists view his work as non-scientific, dependent on theses that cannot be
confirmed by experiments. In the realm of literary and cultural theory, however, Freud's work seems to
have relevance still, and is cited often. How do we understand the gap between a medical/scientific
reading of Freud's work, and a humanist one? Where do we locate Freud's relevance today? The
graduate course will concentrate on Freud's descriptions of psychoanalytic theory and practice, as well
as his writings on literature and culture.
SM 526. (COML525, ENGL590) Theories: Gender, and Sexuality Studies. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s):
A prior course in gender, sexuality and women's studies.
Theories in Gender and Sexuality: Objects, Ideas, Institutions foregrounds new works in feminist
thinking which circumvent and resist stale modes of teaching, in learning and knowing difference and
"the woman question." Our aim is to interrogate the normative directionality of feminist "waves" and
additiveand intersectional models of suturing gender and sexuality to minoritarian politics. We will
conceptualize feminism as relational to studes of affect, object oriented ontology animality, feminist
science, and aesthetics.
SM 527. (AFRC527) Race, Gender and Auto/Biography. (C) Sanders.
Storytelling, oral history, and memoir are some of the oldest forms of documenting lives. Pivoting
around the themes of voices, authenticity and memory, this course considers the methods, theories
and archival practices of autobiography, biography and oral history. It builds on the last two decades of
scholarship that pari oral history with traditional written archival material -- giving particaly attention to
the methodologies and practices used by African descended women and queer storytellers and
listeners. During our discussions, we will consider the ethics between researcher and storyteller while
addressing the following questions: How do emotions, performance, and identities (gender, sexuality,
race, age, (dis)ability, etc.) inform the stories we tell and collect? How does oral history impact the
contemporary construction and narration of history? How does the practice and production of black
women's and queer autobiography, biography and oral history inform interdisciplinary research
methods and blur narrative genres?

Page 8 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
SM 536. (COML546, ENGL546, FREN537, HIST537) The Novel and Marriage. Joan DeJean.
Historians have argued that early novels helped shape public opinion on many controversial issues.
And no subject was nore often featured in novels than marriage. In the course of the 18th and the 19th
centuries, at a time when marriage as an institution was being radically redefined, almost all the best
known novels explored happy as well as unhappy unions, individuals who decided not to marry as well
as those whose lives were destroyed by the institution. They showcased marriage in other words in
ways certain to provoke debate. We will both survey the development of the modern novel from the
late 17th to the early 20th century and study the treatment of marriage in some of the greatest novels
of all time. We will begin with novels from the French and English traditions, the national literatures in
which the genre first took shape, in particular Laclos' DANGEROUS LIAISONS, Austen's PRIDE AND
PREJUDICE, Bronte's JANE EYRE, Flaubert's MADAME BOVERY. We will then turn to works from the
other European traditions such as Goethe's ELECTIVE AFFINITIES and Tolstoy's ANNA KARENINA.
We will begin the course by discussing the novel often referred to as the first modern novel, THE
PRINCESS DE CLEVES. This was also the first novel centered on an exploration of questions centrla
to the debate
We will begin the course by discussing the novel often referred to as the first modern novel, THE
PRINCESS DE CLEVES. This was also the first novel centered on an exploration of questions central
to the debate about marriage for over two centuries - everything from the question of whether one
should marry for love or for social position to the question of adultery. Each week, we will discuss the
changing definitions of the word "marriage" in various European languages. We will also discuss the
laws governing marriage as a civil and as a religious institution were evolving in various European
countries. All readings will be in English. Opened to advance undergraduates with the permission of
the instructor.
SM 539. (RELS539) Medieval and Early Modern Women Visionaries. (C) Matter.
This graduate seminar will examine the works of women visionaries of the Christian tradition in the
medieval and early modern periods, including Hildegard of Bingen, Catherine of Siena, Teresa of
Avila, and others. All readings will be available in English. A research paper will be required from each
student.
SM 544. (ENGL544) Science of Sex & Sexuality. Staff.Prerequisite(s): This is an advanced seminar
for MLA students.
The author of a New York Times article entitled "On Being Male, Female, Neither or Both" concluded
her comments with the following statement: "The definition of sex was (and is) still up for grabs." In our
post-modern world, we have become accustomed to the malleability of gender identity and sexuality.
We are also aware that individuals undergo sex reassignment surgeries but by and large we assume
that transgender people are transitioning from one discrete category to another. Queer activists
certainly challenge this assumption, preferring to envision sex, gender, and sexuality on a continuum,
but these days even scientists don't concur about a definitive definition of sex. Should sex be defined
chiefly by anatomy? Chromosomes? The body's ability to produce and respond to hormones? If the
boundaries of biological categories can be contested, what are the implications for culturally
constructed ideas about gender identity and sexuality.
SM 545. EXPERIMENTAL COURSE. (M)
574. (ARTH505) Masters in Liberal Arts Proseminar. (M) Staff.
Topic varies.

Page 9 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
SM 579. (ENGL456, THAR579) Provocative Performance. (M) Malague.
This course will examine a wide array of performance pieces by and about women, designed to
provoke social, political, and personal change. Ranging from the serious to the hilarious (and
sometimes outrageous), our readings will center on plays and performance art; we will also study live
and filmed pieces, attend course-related productions in the city and on campus, and incorporate
contextual material on feminist theatre theory and history.
SM 584. (PSCI584) Sex & Gender in the History of Political Thought. (M) Hirschmann.
An examination of basic theoretical problems of political science divided into three parts. First, specific
features of social sciences will be examined and three most important general orientations of social
sciences (analytical, interpretative and critical) will be compared and analyzed. Second, basic
concepts of social and political sciences will be studied: social determination, rationality, social
change, politics, power, state, democracy. Third, the problem of value judgments will be considered: Is
there a rational, objective method for the resolution of conflicts in value judgments? Is morality
compatible with politics?
SM 589. (COML590, ENGL590, LALS590) REC ISSUE IN CRIT THEORY. (M)
SM 630. (EALC230, EALC630, GSWS234) Gender and Religion in China. (A) Cheng.
This course examines gender in Chinese religious culture from ancient to contemporary times. We will
explore topics including the Buddhist accommodation of Chinese family system, Chinese
transformation of the bodhisattva Guanyin, female deities in Daoist and popular religious pantheons,
writings about religious women, female ghosts and fox spirits in literary imagination and folk tales, and
the significance of yin force in Chinese medicine and Daoist alchemy. Through the case of China, we
will look at how gender plays critical and constitutive roles in religious traditions, and how religion can
be used both to reinforce and to challenge gender norms.
SM 640. (COML643, FREN640) STUDIES IN RENAISSANCE.
SM 654. (EALC255, EALC655, GSWS254) Japanese Theater. (C) Kano.Prerequisite(s): Reading
knowledge of Japanese and/or previous coursework in literature/theater will be helpful, but not
required.
Japan has one of the richest and most varied theatrical traditions in the world. In this course, we will
examine Japanese theater in historical and comparative contexts. The readings and discussions will
cover all areas of the theatrical experience (script, acting, stage design, costumes, music, audience).
Audio-visual material will be used whenever appropriate and possible. The class will be conducted in
English, with all English materials.
SM 670. (AFRC670, EALC541, HIST670) Topics in Trans Regional History. (C) Brown.
What do historians gain by approaching the past with an awareness of the body as a material and
historically contingent entity? In this course we consider sevveral different ways of imagining historical
bodies and the body in history. Our readings will explore how events and new social, racial, economic
and political formations influence how contemporaries imagined and described bodies and their
capcities. We will also explore whether the body itself might be a dynamic source of historical change.
Among the topics we will discuss are: medical theories about bodies, epidemics and their impact;
sensory capacities; capacities for physical labor; cultures of violence; reproductive capacies and
politics; coerced imgration; fashion, beauty, and grace; and the state's interest in mobilizing bodies to
serve imperial, economic, and military agendas.

Page 10 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
SM 731. (COMM731) Beautiful People. (M) Pearl.
Have concepts of beauty changed over time? According to Darwin, the meaning of facial expressions
and emotions are consistent across cultures and are universally understood. Modern scholarship
would have us believe that notions of human beauty are framed by facial symmetry and reproductive
fitness, while fashion magazines seem to challenge both these claims. What role does technology play
in communicating and shaping ideas of beauty? By the same token, to what extent is technology
deployed in service of the ideas of those behind the lens? In this course, we will explore changing
notions of beauty and their relationship to the technologies and media through which it is viewed.
SM 740. (AFRC740, HIST740) Research Seminar in Middle Eastern History. (M) Staff.
Research seminar on selected topics in Middle Eastern history. See the History's Department website
for course description.
SM 762. (SAST762) Topics in: Women in South Asia. (C) Sreenivasan.
This course on women in South Asian history has several objectives. To comprehend the genres of
narratives in which South Asian women between the sixteenth and twentieth centuries have spoken
and have been spoken about. To gain an understanding of evolving institutions and practices shaping
women' s lives, such as the family, law and religious traditions. To understand the impact of historical
processes -- the formation and and breakdown of empire, colonialism, nationalism and decolonization
-- upon South Asian women between the sixteenth and twentieth centuries. We will read primary
sources in addition to familiarizing ourselves with the historiography of women in South Asia.
771. (EALC771) Current Japanology. (M) Staff.
Major trends in scholarship as reflected in important recent publications, especially formative books
and periodical literatures. The trajectory within certain disciplines as well as the interaction among
them will be critically evaluated in terms of gains and losses. Implications of these theses in the
planning of graduate and postgraduate research.
SM 793. (ARTH793, CINE793, ENGL797) Topics in Cinema and Media. (M) Staff.
Topics vary. Please refer to the History of Art Department's website for the course description: http://
www.sas.upenn.edu/arthistory.
SM 830. (NURS830) RES IN GLOBAL WMN HEALTH. (A)
The course focuses on critical examination of theoretical and methodological issues pertaining to
research on women and girls conducted around the world across disciplines. A focused and intensive
exploration of place as it pertains to women and girls in formal and informal structures of health care
delivery as those needing and/or seeking health care, and as those roviding health care to others. We
will examine multiple dimensions and qualities of these endeavors (e.g. activity, power, control,
visibility, value, and remuneration) and the intersection of gender and health - locally, globally and
across borders. We will focus our examination on the implications of seeking and providing health care
for women's and girls' health and well-being. By examining issues in local and global contexts and
across geographical boundaries, we will have the opportunity to challenge gendered, class, political,
and cultural assumptions related to women's health. Invited guest speakers will highlight examples of
research in global women's health representing multiple disciplinary perspectives.

All Undergraduate and Graduate Courses (formerly GSOC)

Page 11 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
002. Gender and Society. (C) Society Sector. All classes. Staff. Requirement for Gender, Sexuality
and Women's Studies major
This course will introduce students to the ways in which sex, gender, and sexuality mark our bodies,
influence our perceptions of self and others, organize families and work like, delimit opportunities for
individuals and groups of people, as well as impact the terms of local and transnational economic
exchange. We will explore the ways in which sex, gender, and sexuality work with other markers of
difference and social status such as race, age, nationality, and ability to further demarcate possibilities,
freedoms, choices, and opportunities available to people.
L/R 004. (SOCI004) The Family. (C) Society Sector. All classes. Harknett.
Historical and cultural development of the family, analysis of sexual codes; discussion of role
difference between men and women; factors involved in mate selection and marital adjustment;
analysis of family disorganization with both individual and societal implications.
007. (SOCI007) Population and Society. (C) Society Sector. All classes. Flippen, Harknett, Kohler,
Zuberi.
The course serves as an introduction to the study of population and demography, including issues
pertaining to fertility, mortality, migration, and family formation and structure. Within these broad areas
we consider the social, economic, and political implications of current trends, including: population
explosion, baby bust, the impact of international migration on receiving societies, population aging,
racial classification, growing diversity in household composition and family structure, population and
environmental degradation, and the link between population and development/poverty.
SM 009. Critical Writing Seminar In Women's Studies. (C) Staff.
This is a critical writing seminar. It fulfills the writing requirement for all undergraduates. As a disciplinebased writing seminar, the course introduces students to a topic within its discipline but throughout
emphasizes the development of critical thinking, analytical, and writing skills. For current listings and
descriptions, visit the Critical Writing Program's website at www.writing.upenn.edu/critical.
SM 016. (AFRC016, CINE016, ENGL016) Topics in Literature. (C) Staff. Freshman Seminar
Freshman Seminars under the title "Topics in Literature." When the course content includes women,
gender and sexuality this course will be cross listed with GSWS. Freshman seminar under this title will
afford the entering student the opportunity to explore a particular and limited subject with a professor
whose current work lies in that area. Small class-size will insure all students the opportunity to
participate in lively discussions. Students may expect frequent and extensive writing assignments, but
these seminars are not writing courses; rather, they are intensive introductions to the serious study of
literature. Consult Program for detailed descriptions.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description of the
current offerings.
SM 028. (COML028, PHIL028) Introduction to Feminist Philosophy. (M) M. Meyer. Offered through
the College of Liberal and Professional Studies
Feminist theory grows out of women's experiences. In this course we will investigate how some
contemporary feminist thinkers' consideration of women's experience has caused them to criticize
society and philosophy. Traditional philosophical areas addressed may include ethics, social and
political philosophy, aesthetics, philosophy of religion, and epistemology.

Page 12 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
SM 041. (SOCI041) Topics in Sociology. (C) Staff.
Freshman Seminars. Topics vary from semester to semester. Past offerings include Society and
History; The 1960's: Preludes and Postludes; Mistakes, Errors, Accidents & Disasters; Urban Analysis
with Computers; Race and Public Policy; Perspectives on Inequality; Homelessness and the Urban
Crisis.
045. (ENGL045) 18th-Century Novel. (C) Staff.
This survey of the novel addresses key questions about the novel's "rise" in the eighteenth century on
both sides of the Atlantic, as well as attending to the cultural conditions that attended this new literary
from. How did the concurrent "rise" of the middle classes and the emergence of an increasingly female
reading public affect the form and preoccupations of early novels? What role did the institutions like
literary reviews, libraries, and the church play in the novel's early reception? While reading will vary
from course to course, students should expect to read such authors as Austen, Behn, Brockden
Brown, Burney, Defoe, Fielding, Richardson, Rowlandson, Rowson, Scott, and Smollett.
This course will be cross-listed with GSWS when the course content includes women, gender and
sexuality. See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description
of the current offerings.
055. (COML055, ENGL055) Nineteenth-Century Novel. (M) staff. Fulfills Arts & Letters Distribution
During the nineteenth century the novel became the dominant literary form of its day, supplanting
poetry and drama on both sides of the Atlantic. In this introduction to the novelists of the period, we will
read the writers who secured the novel's cultural respectability and economic prominence. Likely
authors will include Austen, the Brontes, Collins, Dickens, Eliot, Hardy, Hawthorne, Melville, Poe,
Thackeray, Scott, and Stowe. The course will explore the themes, techniques, and styles of the
nineteeth-century novel. It will focus not only on the large structural and thematic patterns and
problems within each novel but also on the act of reading as a historically specific cultural ritual in
itself.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description of the
current offerings.
060. (ARTH070, COML070, ENGL070, LALS060) Intro to Latina/o Literature: Beginnings to 1898.
(M) Staff.
A survey of cultural productions by Latinas/os (i.e. people of Latin American descent who have been
raised in the U.S.) that usually will focus on the twentieth century, but might at times examine earlier
periods instead. The course will take a culturally and historically informed approach to a wide range of
novels, poems, plays, and films, and will sometimes include visual art and music. Writers and artists
might include Amrico Paredes, Piri Thomas, Cherrie Moraga, Sandra Cisneros, Julia Alvarez, Junot
Diaz, Cristina Garcia, El Teatro Campesino, John Leguizamo, Carmen Lomas Garza, the Hernandez
Brothers, and Los Tigres del Norte.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description of the
current offerings.
075. (FOLK075, MUSC075) Jazz Style and History. (M) Ramsey, Parberry.
Music 075 401 (Dr. Ramsey): Exploration of the family of musical idioms called jazz. Attention will be
given to issues of style, to selected musicians, and to the social, cultural, and scholarly issues raised
by its study. Music 075 601 (Professor Parberry): Development of jazz from the beginning of the 20th
Century to present. Analysis of the stylistic flux of jazz, such as the progression from dance music to
bebop and the emergence of the avant-garde and jazz rock. Attention will be given to both the artists
who generated the changes and the cultural conditions that often provided the impetus.

Page 13 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
096. (COML096, ENGL096) Theories of Gender and Sexuality. (M) Humanities & Social Science
Sector. Class of 2010 & beyond. Love.
What makes men and women different? What is the nature of desire? This course introduces students
to a long history of speculation about the meaning and nature of gender and sexuality -- a history
fundamental to literary representation and the business of making meaning. We will consider theories
from Aristophanes speech in Platos Symposium to recent feminist and queer theory. Authors treated
might include: Plato, Shakespeare, J. S. Mill, Mary Wollstonecraft, Sigmund Freud, Virginia Woolf,
Simone de Beauvoir, Adrienne Rich, Audre Lorde, Michel Foucault, Gayle Rubin, Catherine
MacKinnon, Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick, Judith Butler, bell hooks, Leo Bersani, Gloria Anzaldua, David
Halperin, Cherre Moraga, Donna Haraway, Gayatri Spivak, Diana Fuss, Rosemary Hennesy, Chandra
Tadpole Mohanty, and Susan Stryker.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description of the
current offerings.
090. (AFRC090, COML090, ENGL090) Gender, Sexuality, and Literature. (C) Staff.
Focusing on literature by and/or about women, this course examines women as readers, writers, and
subjects of literature. Works studied vary considerably from semester to semester and may include a
wide range of works from various countries and in various genres, often selected to allow for
examination of theoretical issues such as feminist humor, feminist literary theory, women and popular
culture, and the place of women in the literary mainstream. Often special attention is paid to the
experience of minority women. For additional information, please see English's website for a
description: https://www.english.upenn.edu
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description of the
current offerings.
SM 100. (COML107, ITAL100) Topics Freshman Seminar. (M) Staff.
Topics Vary. When topics include Gender, Sexuality and Women's Studies the course will be crosslisted with GSWS-100.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description of the
current offerings.
L/R 101. (CINE100, COML117, ENGL101) Study of an Author. (C) Arts & Letters Sector. All Classes.
Staff.
This is an introduction to literary study through the works of a single author--often Shakespeare, but
some versions of this course will feature other writers. (For offerings in a given semester, please see
the on-line course descriptions on the English Department website.) We will read several works and
approach them--both in discussion and in writing--from a range of critical perspectives. The author's
relation to his or her time, to literary history generally, and to the problems of performance, are likely to
be emphasized. This course is designed for the General Requirement; it is also intended to serve as a
first or second course for prospective English majors.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description of the
current offerings.
109. (FOLK029, RELS005) Women and Religion. (C) Humanities & Social Science Sector. Class of
2010 & beyond. Staff.
This course looks at the contrast between the model of the virtuous woman, and the instructive power
of the uncontrollable woman, from 1800 to the present in Hinduism, Christianity, and Islam. Drawing
examples from a variety of historical contexts and traditions, this course will touch on issues of
religious empowerment, piety, leadership, and theoretical questions involving gender, spirituality, the
body, and the intersection of class status and religious performance.

Page 14 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
SM 113. (JWST113, RELS113) Major Western Religious Thinkers. (M) Staff. This course is
crosslisted with RELS 113, a topics course when the subject matter is appropriate to Women's
Studies. See current timetable.
Introduction to the writings of one or two significant western religious thinkers, designed for those who
have no background in religious thought. Possible thinkers to be studied: Augustine, Maimonides,
Spinoza, Luther, Teresa of Avila, Edwards, Mendelssohn, Kierkegaard, DuBois, Bonhoeffer, King.
114. (AFRC112, SOCI112, URBS114) Discrimination: Sexual and Racial Conflict. (M) Society
Sector. All classes. Madden.
This course is concerned with the structure, the causes and correlates, and the government policies to
alleviate discrimination by race and gender in thee United States.The central focus of the course is on
employment differences by race and gender and the extent to which they arise from labor market d
discrimination versus other causes, although racial discrimination in housing is also considered. After
a comprehensive overview of the structures of labo and housing markets and of nondiscriminatory
reasons (that is, the cumulative effects of past discrimination and/or experiences) for the existence of
group differentials in employment, wages and residential locations, various theorie ofthe sources of
current discrimination are reviewed and evaluated. Actual government policies and alternatives
policies are evaluated in light of both the empirical evidence on group differences and the alternative
theories of discrimination.
117. (SOCI117) Sociology of Work. (M) Jacobs, Leidner.
The material world is shaped and maintained through work, but so is the social world. How work is
organized, allocated, and rewarded determines the opportunities people have for developing their own
capacities, the kinds of ties they will have with others, and how much control they will have over their
own lives. We will consider various sociological perspectives on work and compare alternative ways of
organizing work, with a focus on the contemporary United States.
SM 149. Law and Social Policy on Sexuality and Reproduction. (C) Tracy.
This course will examine how statutory law, court decisions and other forms of social policy encourage
or discourage various forms of sexuality, reproduction and parenting. Such issues as contraception,
abortion, gay and lesbian rights, reproductive technology, family violence, and welfare and family
policies will be covered.
SM 118. (CINE118, COML118, GSWS418, NELC118) Iranian Cinema: Gender, Politics and
Religion. (M) Minuchehr.
Post-Revolutionary Iranian cinema has gained exceptional international reception in the past two
decades. In most major national and international festivals, Iranian films have taken numerous prizes
for their outstanding representation of life and society, and their courage in defying censorship barriers.
In this course, we will examine the distinct characteristics of the post-revolutionary Iranian cinema.
Discussion will revolve around themes such as gender politics, family relationships and women's
social, economic and political roles, as well as the levels of representation and criticism of modern
Iran's political and religious structure within the current boundaries. There will be a total of 12 films
shown and will include works by Kiarostami, Makhmalbaf, Beizai, Milani, Bani-Etemad and Panahi,
among others.

Page 15 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
122. (SOCI122) The Sociology of Gender. (C) Society Sector. All classes. Leidner.
Gender is an organizing principle of society, shaping social structures, cultural understandings,
processes of interaction, and identities in ways that have profound consequences. It affects every
aspect of people's lives, from their intimate relationships to their participation in work, family,
government, and other social institutions and their place in the stratification system, Yet gender is such
a taken for granted basis for differences among people that it can be hard to see the underlying social
structures and cultural forces that reinforce or weaken the social boundaries that define gender.
Differences in behavior, power,and experience are often seen as the result of biological imperatives or
of individual choice. A sociological view of gender, in contrast, emphasizes how gender is socially
constructed and how structural constraints limit choice. This course examines how differences based
on gender are created and sustained, with particular attention to how other important bases of
personal identity and social inequality--race and class-interact with patterns of gender relations. We
will also seek to understand how social change happens and how gender inequality might be reduced.
SM 125. (CINE125, COML127, RUSS125) The Adultery Novel. (C) Arts & Letters Sector. All Classes.
Staff. All readings and lectures in English.
The object of this course is to analyze narratives of adultery from Shakespeare to the present and to
develop a vocabulary for thinking critically about the literary conventions and social values that inform
them. Many of the themes (of desire, transgression, suspicion, discovery) at the heart of these stories
also lie at the core of many modern narratives. Is there anything special, we will ask, about the case of
adultery--once called "a crime which contains within itself all others"? What might these stories teach
us about the way we read in general? By supplementing classic literary accounts by Shakespeare,
Pushkin, Flaubert, Chekhov, and Proust with films and with critical analyses, we will analyze the
possibilities and limitations of the different genres and forms under discussion, including novels, films,
short stories, and theatre. What can these forms show us (or not show us)about desire, gender, family
and social obligation? Through supplementary readings and class discussions, we will apply a range
of critical approaches to place these narratives of adultery in a social and literary context, including
formal analyses of narrative and style, feminist criticism, Marxist and sociological analyses of the
family, and psychoanalytic understandings of desire and family.
162. (GRMN262, JWST102, NELC154) Women in Jewish Literature. (C) Arts & Letters Sector. All
Classes. Hellerstein.
This course introduces students of literature, women's studies, and Jewish studies to the long tradition
of women as readers, writers, and subjects in Jewish literature. All texts will be in translation from
Yiddish and Hebrew, or in English. Through a variety of genres--devotional literature, memoir, fiction,
and poetry -- we will study women's roles and selves, the relation of women and men, and the
interaction between Jewish texts and women's lives. The legacy of women in Yiddish devotional
literature will serve as background for our reading of modern Jewish fiction & poetry from the past
century. The course is devided into five segments. The first presents a case study of the Matriarchs
Rachel and Leah, as they are portrayed in the Hebrew Bible, in rabbinic commentary, in pre-modern
prayers, and in modern poems. We then examine a modern novel that recasts the story of Dinah,
Leah's daughter. Next we turn to the seventeenth century Glikl of Hamel, the first Jewish woman
memoirist. The third segment focuses on devotional literature for and by women. In the fourth segment,
we read modern women poets in Yiddish, Hebrew, and English. The course concludes with a fifth
segment on fiction and a memoir written by women in Yiddish, Hebrew, and English.

Page 16 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
182. (STSC182) Social Science and American Culture. (A) Staff.
This course examines the role of social science in the United States during the 20th century. There
have been popular social scientific theories since the early 19th century, when the craze spread for
interpreting individuals' character by feeling the bumps on their heads. But popular social science is
really a 20th century phenomenon. And popular culture influenced academic research. Our coverage
cannot be comprehensive. We have insufficient time to treat all human sciences equally. For example,
there is enormous popular interest in paleoanthropology and archaeology, but we will not discuss
these in class-although you mibht choose to write your research paper for the course on a spcific
aspect of one of these disciplines.
SM 203. (HIST203, HSOC204) Major Seminar in History: America Before 1800. (M) Staff.
This couse is for history majors. This course will be cross-listed with GSWS when the course topic
includes women, gender, and sexuality.
186. (EALC166, EALC566, GSWS586) Gender and Sexuality in Japan. (M) Kano.
This seminar deals with issues which such as the cultural and historical constructions of femininity and
masculinity; gendered division of education and labor; representation of gender and sexuality in
literature, theater, and popular culture; and forms of activism for the rights of women and sexual
minorities. This course will use films, videos, and manga, as well as readings from anthropological,
historical, literary, and theoretical texts. All readings will be in English, but Japanese materials will be
available to those interested.
187. (COML187, EALC017) Possessing Women. (M) Chance, L..
A man from Tennessee writes "Memoirs of a Geisha." A Japanese novelist tells the story of the
"comfort women" who served the Japanese army. A tenth century courtier poses as woman writing the
first woman's diary. Poets from Byron to Robert Lowell, through Ezra Pound to Li Po, have written as
though, they were women, decrying their painful situations. Is something wrong with this picture, or is
"woman" such a fascinating position from which to speak that writers can hardly help trying it on for
size? In this course we will look at male literary impersonators of women, as well as women writers.
Our questions will include who speaks in literature for prostitutes--whose bodies are in some sense
the property of men--and what happens when women inhabit the bodies of other women via spirit
possession. Readings will draw on the Japanese tradition, which is especially rich in such cases, and
will also include Western and Chinese literature, anthropological work on possession, legal treatments
of prostitution, and film. Participants will keep a reading journal and write a paper of their own
choosing.
199. Independent Study. (C)
SM 204. (HIST204) Major Seminar in History: America After 1800. (C) Staff.
This is a topics course in history. When the course content covers topics on women, gender and
sexuality it will be cross-listed with GSWS.

Page 17 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
L/R 213. (CINE215, GSWS513, SAST213, SAST513) Indian Cinema and Society: Bollywood and
Beyond. (B) Staff.
This course examines the history and practices of Indian popular cinema from the early 20th century
to the present. Focusing on recent commercial Hindi cinema, we will learn how to intepret conventions
such as song and dance sequences, melodrama and spectacle. Examining films as objects through
which culture and society are made visible, students will watch films critically for their social, aesthetic
and historical significance in Indian society. We will consider the particular commercial and industrial
structures and practices surrounding Indian cinema, exploring the ways in which it is produced,
circulated, and avidly consumed. We will examine the ways the Indian cinema accounts for nationality,
religion, migration, and gender, and consider themes such as the use and creation of public space,
spectatorship and visuality. This course will enable students to think critically about how cinema
reflects, reforms and re-imagines the culture and society that creates it.
SM 221. (COML222, ENGL222) Topics in Romance. (A) Staff.
This seminar explores an aspect of epic or romance intensively; specific course topics will vary from
year to year.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description of the
current offerings.
222. (AFRC222, AFST221) African Women's Lives: Past and Present 125. (A) Blakely.
Restoring women to African history is a worthy goal, but easier said than done.The course examines
scholarship over the past forty years that brings to light previously overlooked contributions African
women have made to political struggle, religious change, culture preservation, and economic
development from pre-colonial times to present. The course addresses basic questions about
changing women's roles and human rights controversies associated with African women within the
wider cultural and historical contexts in which their lives are lived. It also raises fundamental questions
about sources, methodology, and representation, including the value of African women's oral and
written narrative and cinema production as avenues to insider perspectives on African women's lives.
SM 223. (COML354, ENGL221) Topics in Medieval Literature. (M) Staff.
This seminar explores an aspect of medieval literature intensively; specific course topics will vary from
year to year. Topics in the past have included the medieval performance, medieval women, and
medieval law and literature. The course will be cross-listed with GSWS when the subject matter
includes gender, women, and sexuality.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description of the
current offerings.
SM 234. (EALC230, EALC630, GSWS630) Gender and Religion in China. (M) Cheng, H.
This course examines gender in Chinese religious culture from ancient to contemporary times. We will
explore topics including the Buddhist accommodation of Chinese family system, Chinese
transformation of the bodhisattva Guanyin, female deities in Daoist and popular religious pantheons,
writings about religious women, female ghosts and fox spirits in literary imagination and folk tales, and
the significance of yin force in Chinese medicine and Daoist alchemy. Through the case of China, we
will look at how gender plays critical and constitutive roles in religious traditions, and how religion can
be used both to reinforce and to challenge gender norms.
235. (EDUC235) Psychology of Women. (C) Staff.
Critical analyses of the psychological theories of female development, and introduction to feminist
scholarship on gender development and sexuality.

Page 18 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
SM 250. (CINE251, COML249, ENGL251) Topics in 19th Century Literature. (M) Staff.
This course explores an aspect of 19th-century literature intensively; specific course topics will vary
from year to year.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a description of the current
offerings.
SM 241. (ASAM241, COML239, ENGL241) Topics in Eighteenth Century Bri125h Literature. (M)
Staff. Space will be reserved for English majors.
This is a topics course. If the topic is appropriate, the course is cross-listed with ENGL 241. This
course explores an aspect of 18th-century literature intensively; specific course topics will vary from
year to year.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description of the
current offerings.
SM 245. (ENGL245) Topics in 18 C. Novel. (M) Staff.
The primary for this course is the English Department. When the course content includes gender,
sexuality and women's studies it will be cross-listed with GSWS. See additional information and
description on the English Department's website: https://www.english.upenn.edu
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description of the
current offerings.
SM 249. (EDUC576, PHIL249) Philosophy of Education. (M) Detlefsen.
L/R 252. (COML253, ENGL105, GRMN253, HSOC253, STSC253) Freud: The Invention of
Psychoanalysis. (M) Humanities & Social Science Sector. Class of 2010 & beyond. Weissberg. All
readings and lectures in English.
No other person of the twentieth century has probably influenced scientific thought, humanistic
scholarship, medical therapy, and popular culture as much as Sigmund Freud. This course will study
his work, its cultural background, and its impact on us today.
In the first part of the course, we will learn about Freud's life and the Viennese culture of his time.
We will then move to a discussion of seminal texts, such as excerpts from his Interpretation of
Dreams, case studies, as well as essays on psychoanalytic practice, human development, definitions
of gender and sex, neuroses, and culture in general. In the final part of the course, we will discuss the
impact of Freud's work. Guest lectureres from the medical field, history of science, psychology, and the
humnities will offer insights into the reception of Freud's work, and its consequences for various fields
of study and therapy.
SM 255. (COML261, ENGL255, GSWS654) Topics in the 19th-Century Novel. (M) Staff.
This course explores an aspect of the 19th-century novel intensively; specific course topics will vary
from year to year.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description of the
current offerings.

Page 19 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
257. (CINE222, COML256, EALC151, EALC551) Contemporary Fiction and Film in Japan. (M)
Kano.
This course will explore fiction and film in contemporary Japan, from 1945 to the present. Topics will
include literary and cinematic representation of Japan s war experience and post-war reconstruction,
negotiation with Japanese classics, confrontation with the state, and changing ideas of gender and
sexuality. We will explore these and other questions by analyzing texts of various genres, including film
and film scripts, novels, short stories, mangazines, and academic essays. Class sessions will combine
lectures, discussion, audio-visual materials, and creative as well as analytical writing exercises. The
course is taught in English, although Japanese materials will be made available upon request. No prior
coursework in Japanese literature, culture, or film is required or expected; additional secondary
materials will be available for students taking the course at the 600 level. Writers and film directors
examined may include: Kawabata Yasunari, Hayashi Fumiko, Abe Kobo, Mishima Yukio, Oe
Kenzaburo, Yoshimoto Banana, Ozu Yasujiro, Naruse Mikio, Kurosawa Akira, Imamura Shohei,
Koreeda Hirokazu, and Beat Takeshi.
SM 260. (AFRC262, AFST260, COML262, ENGL260, LALS260) Topics in The Novel. (M) Staff.
This course explores an aspect of the novel intensively, asking how novels work and what they do to
us and for us. Specific course topics will vary from year to year.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description of the
current offerings.
265. (ANTH265) Sex and Reproduction in Humans: A Biocultural Approach. (A)
Valeggia.Prerequisite(s): ANTH 003.
An exploration of human reproduction from an evolutionary and biosocial perspective. Focuses on
physiological, ecological, and social aspects of human reproduction with a life cycle approach. Also
explores human reproductive strategies in a variety of cultural settings. Topics include cognitive and
behavioural differences between men and women and male and female reproductive strategies.
Examples are drawn primarily feom traditional and modern human societies; data from studies of nonhuman primates are also considered.
SM 266. (COML263, ENGL261) Topics in 20th C. Literature. (C) Staff.
The course explores an aspect of 20th-century literature intensively; specific course topics will vary
from year to year.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description of the
current offerings.
270. (FOLK270) Folklore and Sexuality. (M) Azzolina.
Sexuality is not only a biological act or fact, it also has a creative and aesthetic element. This course
examines the folklore elements of sexuality and includes historical readings such as the Bible and the
Decameron as well as a contemporary look at topics such as body art and clothing choice. A fieldbased paper will be required and a final examination will be given on class discussions and readings.
SM 284. (AFRC263, ENGL253) Topics in American Literature. (M) Staff.
This course explores an aspect of 19th-century American literature intensively; specific course topics
will vary from year to year. When the course content includes gender, sexuality and/or women's
studies the course will be cross-listed with GSWS.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description of the
current offerings.

Page 20 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
SM 279. (THAR279) Women in Theatre and Performance. (M) Malague.
Theatre began as a form that excluded women entirely. The plays of ancient Greece and Elizabethan
England were written and performed only by men, beginning a long tradition of theatre that
represented women only from male perspectives. Has that tradition been so dominant for so long that
women's voices on stage are still a novelty? This course focuses on a wide range of plays and
performances by and about women; the work we read (and view) will evidence artistic attempts to
represent women's lives, experiences and perspectives on the stage. Among the issues encountered
and examined in these works are the roles of love, sexuality, friendship, career, community, marriage,
motherhood, family, and feminism in women's lives - as well as the economic and political position(s)
of women in society. The course will also offer contextual background on feminist theatre history,
theory, and literature, the diverse (and divergent) creative efforts of female artists to use live
performance as a means of creating social and political change.
280. (PSCI280) Feminist Political Thought. (M) Society Sector. All classes. Hirschmann.
This course is designed to provide an overview of the variety of ideas, approaches, and subfields
within feminist political thought. Readings and divided into three sections: contemporary theorizing
about the meaning of "feminism";women in the history of Western political thought; and feminist
theoretical approaches to practical political problems and issues, such as abortion and sexual assault.
SM 282. (SAST282) Globalization in a Gender Perspective. (M) Staff.
This interdisciplinary seminar will explore theories and practices of globalization. The process of
globalization raises many questions that scholars are attempting to answer. What are its historical
roots? Why has it seen such rapid growth? Is globalization predominantly an economic, cultural or
ideological issue? Has it affected women and men equally? The seminar will consider present
discussions on globalization, provide tools to analyze this concept critically, and introduce examples
taken from the Third World, Europe, and the United States. Students will be expected to write several
short papers and take an active part in class discussions. The final exam will consist of an extended
essay on topics dealt with in class.
SM 287. (AFRC287, CINE286) Topics in Africana Studies. (C) Staff. This course will be cross-listed
with GSWS when the content includes gender, sexuality, and women's studies.
See the Africana Studies Program's website at www.sas.upenn.edu/africana for a description of the
current offerings.
SM 290. (AFRC290, ENGL290) Topics in Women and Literature. (C) Staff. This course is not open
to freshman.
The primary for this course is the English Department. When the course content includes gender,
sexuality and women's studies it will be cross-listed with GSWS. See additional information and
description on the English Department's website: https://www.english.upenn.edu
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description of the
current offerings.

Page 21 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
SM 310. (COML310, ITAL310) The Medieval Reader. (M) Staff. All Readings and Lecture in English.
Through a range of authors including Augustine, Dante, Petrarch, Galileo, and Umberto Eco, this
course will explore the world of the book in the manuscript era. We will consider 1)readers in fictionmale and female, good and bad; 2)books as material objects produced in monasteries and their
subsequent role in the rise of the universities; 3)medieval women readers and writers; 4)medieval
ideas of the book as a symbol (e.g., the notion of the world as God's book; 5)changes in book culture
brought about by printing and electroni media. Lectures with discussion in English, to be
supplemented by slide presentations and a field trip to the Rare Book Room in Van Pelt Library. No
prerequisites. Readings available either in Italian or English. Satisfies General Requirement in Arts
and Letters.
SM 318. (HSOC341, NURS318) Race, Gender, Class and the History of American Health Care.
(C) Fairman.
This multidisciplinary course surveys the history of American health care through the multiple
perspectives of race, gender, and class, and grounds the discussions in contemporary health issues. It
emphasizes the links between the past and present, using not only primary documents but materials
from disciplines such as literature, art, sociology, and feminist studies that relate both closely and
tangentially to the health professions and health care issues. Discussions will surround gender, classbased, ethnic, and racial ideas about the construction of disease, health and illness; the development
of health care institutions; the interplay between religion and science; the experiences of patients and
providers; and the response to disasters and epidemics.
SM 320. Contemporary Feminist Thought. (A) Kurz.Prerequisite(s): One prior gender, sexuality and
women's studies course.
This course covers a broad range of feminist writers, from the pioneer thinkers of the 18th century to
current feminists who focus on globalization. After examining how and why feminist thought developed,
we will explore how different feminists perspectives explain gender inequality both in the US and in
contemporary global contexts. Readings will also focus on how gender issues interact with race,
ethnity, sexuality, and social class. We will also focus on how feminist theory informs current social
movements for gender equality.
344. (EDUC345) Psychology of Personal Growth. (C) Staff.
Intellectual, emotional and behavioral development in the college years. Illustrative topics: developing
intellectual and social competence; developing personal and career goals; managing interpersonal
relationships; values and behavior. Recommended for submatriculation in Psychological Services
Master's Degree program.
SM 324. (HSOC324, NURS324) Children's Health in the United States, 1800-2000. (C) Connolly.
For Benjamin Franklin Scholars & Nursing Honors Students
This course explores the impact of historical ideas, events, and actors pertaining to the history of
children's health care in the United States. Emphasis is placed on tracing the origins and evolution of
issues that have salience for twenty-first century children's health care policy and the delivery of care.

Page 22 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
SM 338. (HSOC338, NURS338) "Sweet Little Old Ladies and Sandwiched Daughters": Social
Images and Issues in our Aging Society. (B) Kagan.
This course is an intensive and focused introduction to social gerontology as a trans-disciplinary lens
through which to examine aspects of social structure, actions, and consequences in an aging society.
A variety of sources are employed to introduce students from any field focused on human behavior
and interaction to classical notions of social gerontology and current scholarly inquiry in gerontology.
Field work in the tradition of thick description creates a mechanism to engage students in newly
gerontological understandings of their life worlds and daily interactions. Weekly field work, observing
aspects of age and representations of aging and being old in every day experiences forms, is
juxtaposed against close critical readings of classical works in social gerontology and current research
literature as well as viewings of film and readings of popular literature as the basis for student analysis.
Student participation in the seminar demands careful scrutiny and critical synthesis of disparate
intellectual, cultural, and social perspectives using readings and field work and creation of oral and
written arguments that extend understandings of the issues at hand in new and substantive ways.
Emphasis is placed on analysis of field work and literature through a series of media reports and a
final term paper.
SM 341. (ENGL341) Topics in 18th Century Literature. (M) staff. Benjamin Franklin Seminar
This course explores an aspect of 18th-century British literature intensively; specific course topics will
vary from year to year. This is an english course when the course topic includes gender, sexuality and
women's studies it will be cross-listed with GSWS.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description of the
current offerings.
349. (HIST349) History of Sexuality in the U.S. (C) Peiss.
This course introduces students to a relatively new field of inquiry, the history of sexuality in the U.S. It
explores the past to consider why sexuality has been so central to American identities, culture, and
politics. Primary documents and other readings focus on the history of sexual ideology and regulation;
popular culture and changing sexual practices; the emergence of distinct sexual identity and
communities; the politics of sexuality; and the relationship between sexual and other forms of social
difference, such as gender, race, ethnicity, age, and class. Topics include many themes with continuing
relevance to contemporary public debate: among them, sexual representation and censorship, sexual
violence, adolescent sexuality, the politics of reproduction, gay and lesbian sexualities and sexually
transmitted diseases.
SM 350. (COML350) Theory of Literature. (M) Staff.
This course includes both a general survey of classic writings in Western aesthetics as well as
readings on the major trends in literary criticism in the twentieth century. A recurring theme will be the
literary canon and how it reflects or influences values and interpretative strategies. Among the topics
covered are feminist literary criticism, structuralism and poststructuralism, Marxist criticism, and
psychological criticism. Authors include Plato, Aristotle, Hume, Kant, Hegel, T.S. Eliot, Bakhtin, Sontag,
Barthes, Foucault, Derrida, Virginia Woolf, de Beauvoir, Showalter, Cixous, Gilbert and Guber,
Kolodny, Marx, Benjamin, and Freud.

Page 23 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
SM 360. (FREN360) French Literature of the 18th Century. (M) Staff.
Throughout the 18th Century, the novel was consistently chosen by the philosophes as a forum in
which to present political ideas to a broad audience. French novels of the Enlightenment are therefore
often hybrid works in which fictional plots, even love stories, co-exist with philosophical dialogue and
with more or less fictionalized discussions of recent political events or debates. We will read novels by
all the major intellectual figures of the 18th century -- for example, Montesquieu's "Lettres Persanes,"
"Contes" by Voltaire, Diderot's "Le Neveu De Rameau"-- in order to examine the controversial subject
matter they chose to explore in a fictional format and to analyze the effects on novelistic structure of
this invasion of the political. We will also read works, most notably Laclos' "Les Liaisons
Dangereuses," that today are generally thought to reflect the socio-political climate of the decades that
prepared the French Revolution of 1789. In all our discussion, we will be asking ourselves why and
how, for the only time in the history of the genre, the novel could have been, in large part and for most
of the century, partially diverted from fictional concerns and chosen as a political vehicle.
SM 390. (ENGL390) Topics in Gender, Sexuality and Literature. (M) Staff. Benjamin Franklin
Seminar
The advanced women's studies course in the English department, focusing on a particular aspect of
literature by and about women. Topics might include: "Victorian Literary Women"; "Women, Politics,
and Literature"; "Feminist Literary Theory";and similar foci.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a description of the current
offerings.
422. History of Sexuality. (B) Rabberman. Master in Liberal Arts course
In this course, rather than simply debating changes in sexual practices over time, we will discuss the
ways in which different societies in the past and present constructed sexual norms and understood
normality and deviance in sexual terms. We will focus special attention on the following questions: To
what extent are sexual identities constructed by different cultures, rather than simply being determined
biologically? What influence do social, economic, and political conditions have on social constructions
of sexuality? How have different societies used sexual norms to mark "natural" practices from "deviant"
ones, and how are these norms connected to societies' power structures? We will explore case
studies from Classical Greece through the contemporary United States. Our readings will explore
topics such as medieval and modern views of the body, gender, sexuality, and science; prostitutes in
medieval and Victorian England; same-sex relationships from classical Greece to medieval Europe to
the contemporary United States; expectations for sexuality within and outside marriage;
hermaphrodites; and sexual deviants, among others.
Students will be expected to participate actively in class discussions, and to complete short
response papers and a longer research paper.
SM 400. Senior Seminar. (E) Kurz.
This course is for senior undergraduate Women's Studies majors who will be completing their thesis.
The seminar helps students decide on the most appropriate methodologies to use and topics to
include in their thesis. Other topics include thesis organization and drawing conclusions from primary
and secondary sources of data.

Page 24 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
SM 414. Family Ties: Function and Ideology. (M) Rabberman.
Families serve as the basic building blocks of societies. Besides helping to distribute economic
resources within a society, families reflect societies' values, norms, tensions and power dynamics
through their structure. Furthermore, changes in the family's values, functions and structures mirror
changes in women's roles and experiences, both inside and outside the home. Finally, families also
serve as the repository for memories from generation to generation.
In this course, we will explore some central debates and issues in the history of the family by
focusing on case studies from England, France, Germany, and the United States from the medieval
through the modern periods. How are families created and dissolved over time, and how did changes
in these practices come about? How did people make the decision to get married, and how important
were affective ties and material considerations in this process? How did past societies treat their
children, and did love for children increase over time? Which people, inside and outside families,
exerted power over family members? How did political and economic developments influence families'
structure, function, and ideology? What do the changing structure and purpose of families in the West
tell us about changes in the role of the individual and the relationship between public and private in the
West? What do recent family histories tell us about the relationship between the past and the present,
between individuals and ancestors, at the end of the twentieth century?
Class requirements will include participation in class discussion, in-class presentations, two short
papers, and a 15-20 page paper based on primary sources. Class readings will draw on works from
women' studies, historical anthropology, social history, legal history, material culture, sociology, and
literature, and will include both primary and secondary sources.
420. Witchcraft and Gender in the Early Modern World. (M) Rabberman. Master in Liberal Arts
course
From the 15th century through the 18th century, social tensions erupted in Europe and the colonies in
the witch craze, a period when intense cultural concern over witchcraft was expressed through
religious treatises and sermons, popular literature like pamphlets and broadsides, legal accusations,
trials, and, in some cases, executions. Although scholars argue vehemently about the total number of
people executed during the witch-hunts, their importance in understanding early modern beliefs and
responses to social tensions is clear. In this class, we will explore historians' understandings of the
causes underlying this cultural phenomenon. With special attention to gender, social position,and
religious belief, we will join academic debates about the causes of these persecutions. We will also
read some primary sources from the medieval through the early modern periods, including trial
transcripts, sermons, and pamphlets. Were women the main target of witchcraft accusations and
executions, and if so, was misogyny their most important cause? What role did sexual norms and
beliefs have in the way that accusations were framed? Were there different patterns of accusation and
executions across time and region, and if so, what social and cultural factors might explain them?
SM 430. (CINE492, COMM430) Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Representation. (A)
Staff.Prerequisite(s): COMM 123 or SOCI 137/FOLK 137 or Permission from the Instructor.
This class investigates the history of LGBT representation in a range of nd popular media since the
1960s - in film, television, music, pornography, th internet, video games, and so on. We will consider
on-going debates about queer images, including stereotypes, camp, and the value of limits of "positive
images." The class includes a strong emphasis on independent o research: students will learn how to
develop and carry out an original qualitative research project throughout the semester.

Page 25 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
SM 503. HYST/PATHO OF THE FEM. (M) Adley. Master in Liberal Arts course
This seminar traces hysteria as a uniquely female malady from Hippocrates, to nineteenth century
France and Jean-Martin Charcot, from Sigmund Freud in Vienna 1900, to French feminist reflections
on hysteria in the 1970s, such as Luce Iragaray's "La Mysterique," up until more recent reimaginations
of the figure, ending with a consideration of what today's hysteria looks like and the women who are
"afflicted." Through hysteria, we will consider the ways in which illness has been feminized and women
have been patholgized not only in the past, but in the 21st century. Furthermore, we will consider the
sick feminine beyond gender binaries and consider how that which is sick is feminine -- weak, inferior,
passive -- even when not biogically female. The course will draw from a variety of texts (literary,
historical, scientific, and psycological), film, and recent media (from newspapers and magazines to
blogs, twitter, Facebook, etc.).
SM 432. Family Dramas, Family Players. (M) Burnham.
Though families have been the subject of literary scrutiny at least since Oedipus Rexm Eugene
O'Neil's magisterial Loong Day's Journey Into Night was arguably the first American work to look
unflinchingly at the darker side of family life. In this course, we will read twentieth century novels, plays
stories and poems (as well as some nonliterary theoretical works on gender) that show the family as a
whole, albeit a fragmented whole. We will read stories by the Irish writers William Trevor and Edna
O'Brien who show marriage in various stages of decay, as well as two short novels by the American
Jane Smiley whose family survives their crises. We'll look at the relationship of neighborhood and
family through stories by the African-American writers John Edgar Wideman and Toni Cade Bambara.
Arthur Miller's "Death of a Saleman" and poems from Life Studies by Robert Lowell will let us examine
family through the lens of America's obsession with success. Finally, we'll look at families with
traditional homes, through Barbara Kingsolver's "The Bean Trees" and Marilynne Robinson's
"Housekeeping." Several of the works on the list have been made into excellent films, and we will
watch at least two. Brief weekly response papers will encourage all to participate in discussion. There
will be a final comparative paper, and no exam.
SM 447. (ANTH447) Human Reproductive Ecology. (J) Valeggia.Prerequisite(s): ANTH 003 and
either ANTH 143, 105, or 106.
A seminar-style graduate and advanced undergraduate course designed to provide an overview of the
latest advances in human reproductive ecology and the mechanics of writing a proposal. We will
discuss readings and exchange ideas on the different directions that this relatively new discipline may
take. As a way of reviewing the material and train ourselves to present our ideas to a funding agency,
we will write individual research proposals.
499. Independent Study. (C)
513. (CINE215, GSWS213, SAST213, SAST513) Indian Cinema & Society. (B) Staff.
This course will meet for three hours to view and discuss a variety of films/videos in Hindi, Tamil,
Bengali, Urdu (with English subtitles), and English, which bring up issues of social, political, and
cultural significance. Readings for the course will include articles in various fields ranging from film
studies and communication to sociolinguistics and women's studies. Discussions will focus on cinema
as a means of expression and as an instrument for social change, examining the various ways in
which films both reflect and influence contemporary culture.

Page 26 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
SM 516. (AFST516, ANTH516, URBS516) Public Interest Workshop. (M) Staff.
This is a Public Interest Ethnography workshop (originally created by Peggy Reeves Sanday Department of Anthropology) that incorporates an interdisciplinary approach to exploring social issues.
Open to graduate and advanced undergraduate students, the workshop is a response to Amy
Gutmann's call for interdisciplinary cooperation across the University and to the Department of
Anthropology's commitment to developing public interest research and practice as a disciplinary
theme. Rooted in the rubric of public interest social science, the course focuses on: 1) merging
problem solving with theory and analysis in the interest of change motivated by a commitment to
social justice, racial harmony, equality, and human rights; and 2) engaging in public debate on human
issues to make research results accessible to a broader audience. The workshop brings in guest
speakers and will incorporate original ethnographic research to merge theory with action. Students are
encouraged to apply the framing model to a public interest research and action topic of their choice.
This is an academically-based-community-service (ABCS) course that partners directly with Penn's
Netter Center Community Partnerships.
518. (NURS518) Nursing, Health and Illness in the U.S., 1860-1985. (B) Wall.
This course examines changing ideas about the nature of health and illness; changing forms of health
care delivery; changing experiences of women as providers and patients; changing role expectations
and realities for nurses; changing midwifery practice; and changing segmentation of the health care
labor market by gender, class and race. It takes a gender perspective on all topics considered in the
course. A comparative approach is used as national and international literature is considered. This
focus is presented as one way of understanding the complex interrelationships among gender, class,
and race in health care systems of the United States and countries abroad.
SM 528. (HSSC528) Gender and Science. (M) Lindee.
With a special focus on methods, this course explores the rich literature on gender and technical
knowledge.
SM 546. (SOCI546) Feminist Theory. (M) Leidner.
Feminist activists and academics have posed fundamental challenges to existing approaches to social
theory. This seminar explores the development of feminist theory since the 1960s, focusing on
approaches that have the most relevance for social science. The relations among feminist theorizing,
research, and activism will be emphasized.
SM 532. (DEMG541, SOCI541) Gender, the Labor Force and Labor Markets. (M) Madden.
Drawing from sociology, economics and demography, this course examines the causes and effects of
gender differences in labor force participation, earnings and occupation in the United States and in the
rest of the developed developed and developing world. Differences by race and ethnicity areidered.
also considered. Theories of labor supply, marriage, human captial andre discrimination are explored
as explanations for the observed trends.se reviews Finally, the course reviews current labor market
policies and uses thearriage, theories of labor supply, marriage, human capital and discrimination to
men. evaluate their effects on women and men.
SM 537. (COML521, ITAL537) Boccaccio. (M) Kirkham.
Boccaccio's life and work in the context of Italian and European culture and society.

Page 27 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
SM 542. (SOCI542) Work and Gender. (M) Leidner.
This seminar examines the relevance of gender to the organization and experience of paid and unpaid
work. Combining materialist and social constructuionist approaches, we will consider occupational
segregation, the relation of work and family, gender and class solidarity, the construction of gender
through work, race and class variation in work experiences, and related topics.
SM 553. (COML554, ENGL553, HIST553) British Women Writers. (M) Bowers.
A study of British women writers, often focusing on the women authors who came into prominence
between 1775 and 1825.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description of the
current offerings.
555. (NURS555) Women and Incarceration. (A) Brown, K.; Guidera; Durain.
This elective course will afford students the opportunity to participate in service learning and health
education in the Philadelphia prison system, in particular to incarcerated women. Students will explore
the social and historical framework and trends in the incarceration of women and the health status of
incarcerated women. During seminar discussions with experts in the criminal justice system and with
staff and inmates at Riverside, the Philadelphia women's jail, students will explore the health, health
care and health care needs of incarcerated women and identify specific areas in need of attention,
especially with regard to health education. In collaboration with Philadelphia jail staff and female
inmates, students will design and implement a health education project.
SM 556. (CINE556, COML557, ENGL556) Topics in Nineteenth Century Literature. (M) Staff.
This course covers topics in ninteenth-century British Literature, its specific emphasis varying with the
instructor.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description of the
current offerings.
SM 566. (COML566, ENGL566) Topics in Literature and the Law. (M) Staff.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description of the
current offerings.
SM 569. (AFRC569, COML569, ENGL569) Topics in American Literature. (M) Staff.
This is a topics course where the primary is English. When the topic is Gay/Lesbian/Queer Studies
and 19th Century American Literature or African American and Chicana Feminism, this course will be
cross listed with women's studies.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description of the
current offerings.
572. (EDUC572) Language and Gender. (B) Pomerantz.
A critical investigation of the relationship between language, gender, and social structure which
addresses the role of language in reflecting and perpetuating gender divisions. Students' ongoing
discourse analytic projects are integral to our exploration of issues related to sexism in and through
language. Implications for individual and social change are discussed.

Page 28 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
588. (NURS588) The Politics of Women's Health Care. (B) Durain, McCool.
This course will utilize a multidisciplinary approach to address the field of women's health care. The
constructs of women's health care will be examined from a clinical, as well as sociological,
anthropological and political point of view. Topics will reflect the historical movement of women's health
care from an an obstetrical/gynecological view to one that encompasses the entire life span and life
needs of women. The emphasis of the course will be to undertake a critical exploration of the diversity
of women's health care needs and the past and current approaches to this care. Issues will be
addressed from both a national and global perspective, with a particular focus on the relationship
between women's equality/inequality status and state of health.
590. (EDUC590) Gender and Education (ELD). (B) Schultz; Kuriloff.
This course is designed to provide an overview of the major discussions and debates in the area of
gender and education. While the intersections of gender, race, class, ethnicity, and sexuality are
emphasized throughout this course, the focus of the research we will read is on gender and education
in English-speaking countries. We will examine theoretical frameworks of gender and use these to
read popular literature, examine teaching practices and teachers with respect to gender, using case
studies to investigate the topics.
SM 594. (ARTH593, CINE590, COML599) Topics in Contemporary Art. (M)
Topics vary. The primary for this course is the Art History Department. For a course description please
see their website: http://www.sas.upenn.edu/arthistory/courses
599. Independent Study. (C) Staff.
SM 610. (COML610, HIST610) Topics in American History. (A) Staff.
Reading and discussion course on selected topics in American history.
612. (EDUC612) Counseling and Development of LGBT Individuals. (L) Wortman.
In the past quarter century, the awareness of the unique issues facing lesbian, gay, bisexual and
transgender (LGBT) individuals has expanded and become essential knowledge in our work as
educators, providers of psychological services, and other service provision fields. This course provides
a contextual and applied understanding the interactional processes facing LGBT individuals.
SM 705. (AFST705, ANTH705, COML715, FOLK715, MUSC705) Seminar in Ethnomusicology. (A)
Staff.
Topics in Ethnomusicology. Imagining Africa Musically: This seminar considers ways in which scholars
write about and imagine the African continent through the lens of musical performance. We will
consider a range of writings about Africa as a continent, regionally, and nationally, including north
Africa and the Maghreb through series of themes including: diaspora, cosmopolitanism, gender,
spirituality, and as world music. This is a reading and listening intensive seminar.
SM 735. (COML637, ENGL735) Shakespeare. (M) Staff.
An advanced seminar, usually focused on Shakespeare, treating the literature and culture of the late
16th- and early 17th-centuries.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description of the
current offerings.

Page 29 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
SM 751. (ENGL751) British Women Poets. (M) Staff.
An advanced seminar in British poetry by women. This course has generally focused on the period
from 1770-1830 when more than 300 women published at least one volume of poetry.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description of the
current offerings.
SM 769. (COML769, ENGL769, NELC783, SAST769) Feminist Theory. (M) Loombia.
Specific topic varies. Dissent is a key word in our world today--from the Arab Spring to the American
Fall, we have seen expressions of political disobedience and protest around the world. It is more
urgent than ever to consider what dissent might mean, what shapes it has taken historically, what
connection might exist between it and literature, and what futures are possible. We will read key critical
and theoretical work alongside some powerful, tender and controversial writings and films (largely but
not exclusively produced in the postcolonial world), to inquire into the politics and poetics of
governance and dissent. Students are invited to make connections with other historical and
geographical contexts, and explore the different forms of dissent individual, collective, urban, rural,
nationalist, pan-nationalist, religious, marxist, or feminist, to name but a few. We will pay special
attention to different performances of dissent at a popular, mass or individual level. We will think about
the social and cultural channels attention to different performances of dissent at a popular, mass or
individual level.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description of the
current offerings.
SM 773. (AFRC773, ENGL773) Modernism. (M) Mahaffey.
An interdisciplinary and international examination of modernism, usually n to treating European as well
as British and American modernists.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description of the
current offerings.
SM 778. (COML778) Twentieth-Century Aesthetics. (M) Steiner.
This course explores notions that have conditioned twentieth-century attitudes toward beauty: among
them, ornament, form, fetish, and the artifact "women". The moves to twentieth-century fiction, art,
manifestos, theory, and such phenomena as beauty contests and art adjudications.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description of the
current offerings.
SM 790. (COML790, ENGL790) Recent Issues in Critical Theory. (M) Staff.
The primary for this course is the English Department. When the course content includes gender,
sexuality and women's studies it will be cross-listed with GSWS. See additional information and
description on the English Department's website: https://www.english.upenn.edu
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a complete description of the
current offerings.

Page 30 of 31

GENDER STUDIES AND WOMEN'S STUDIES
(AS) {GSWS}
SM 806. (COMM806) Gender, Globalization and Media. (M) Staff.
This seminar creates a forum for debate over the ways in which the cultural politics of gender structure
the historical, economic and social landscapes of media globalization Media culture, as the course
readings seek to show, provides a fertile site to examine how globalized media practices articulate
gendered imaginations. Adopting a transnational feminist perspective, the seminar specifically address
between and among media technologies, representations, and institutions and the complex scripting
of gendered meanings and subject positions in multiple locations in the global public sphere. Course
topics include globalization and transnational and postcolonial feminist theories; gender, sexuality, and
media; gender and labor in globalized media industries; femininity, consumerism, and global
advertising; gender, global media, and morality; tourism, gender, and media economies; and gender,
religion, and popular culture. For the major assignment, students will be expected to produce a
research paper that focuses on one of the following: a critical review of a set of theories or a body of
empirical work in a specific region; textual analysis of media with special attention to influences of
globalization; political-economic analysis of media institutions and corporate practices.

Page 31 of 31

