HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
ANCIENT HISTORY (ANCH): All courses taken in Ancient History (ANCH) at the University
of Pennsylvania will be considered equivalent to courses taken within the History Department.
038. (ENGL043) Early American Literature.
An introduction to the English-language literatures of North America and the Caribbean from the late
16th to the early 19th centuries. Works in various genres by Thomas Hariot, John Smith, William
Bradford, Mary Rowlandson, Anne Bradstreet, Jonathan Edwards, Sarah Knight, Franklin, Jefferson,
Wheatley, Freneau, Bryant, Poe, and many others.
393. (EALC185, ECON029) South Korea: Economy & Policy. Kim.
South Korea ("Korea" hereafter) has achieved a remarkable economic development during the past
half a century. Originally a poor agrarian economy, Korea joined the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), a club of 34 wealthy nations, as a second member from Asia
after Japan. Furthermore, Korea emerged from an aid-recipient to a donor country. Many developing
economies in particular took note, seeking to learn policy lessons from Korea's development
experiences. Taught by a former governor of the Bank of Korea, a Penn Econmics Ph.D., this course
covers three themes. The first part examines the sources of successes for rapid industrialization with
maintaining fair income distributions during the first five decades since Korea's liberation from the
Japanese colonial rule in 1945. Government-led development strategy was instrumental to bringing
such remarkable socioeconomic achievements. Part II analyzes how Korea overcame major economic
crises in the late 1990s and in recent years. Korea recovered more quickly than most of the
neighboring economies experiencing crises at the same time. Third, we examine Korea's continued
efforts to integrate its economy into the global economy further through, among others, Free Trade
Agreements (FTA) with advanced economies such as the United States.
SM 528. (HSPV528) AMER VERNACULAR ARCHITEC.

General Survey Courses (1-99)
001. Making of the Modern World. (A) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Cassanelli/Hahn.
How did the world we now live in come to be? Is globalization a recent development or does it have a
history of its own? At what point can we say that a world economy emerged and what sort of relations
of production and distribution linked it together? When did people start thinking and acting as citizens
of nations rather than as subjects of rulers or members of religious or ethnic communities, and what
were the consequences? How should we conceptualize the great revolutions (French, American,
Russian, Chinese) that would determine the landscapes of modern global politics? This course is
designed to help us think about the "making of the modern," not by means of an exhaustive survey but
by exploring a range of topics from unusual perspectives: piracy, patriotism, prophecy; global struggles
for political and human rights,drivers of war and peace, capitalism, nationalism, socialism, fascism,
fundamentalism; communication and culture.

Page 1 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
011. Deciphering America. (C) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Brown/Licht.
This course examines American history from the first contacts of the indigenous peoples of North
America with European settlers to our own times by focusing on a few telling moments in this history.
The course treats twelve of these moments. Each unit begins with a specific primary document,
historical figure, image, location, year, or cultural artifact to commence the delving into the American
past. Some of these icons are familiar, but the ensuing deciphering will render them as more
complicated; some are unfamiliar, but they will emerge as absolutely telling. The course meets each
week for two 50-minute team-taught lectures and once recitation session. Course requirements
include: in-class midterm and final exams; three short paper assignments; and punctual attendance
and participation in recitations.
023. (NELC102) Intro to Middle East.
L/R 024. (ANCH025, NELC101) Introduction to the Ancient Near East. (D) History & Tradition
Sector. All classes. Frame.
See primary department (NELC) for a complete course description.
030. The Emergence of Modern Europe. (C) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Moyer.
This course traces the formation of European society, politics and culture from its earliest days through
the era of the Reformation, ca. 1000-1600 CE. Major themes will include: politics and power; law and
the state; economics and trade; religion; learning and the rise of universities; social organization;
everyday life. The reading and analysis of primary sources from each era will be important in
understanding Europe's key features and development.
L/R 031. Making and Breaking European Hegemony. (C) History & Tradition Sector. All classes.
Holquist and Safley.
HIST 031 will trace the dramatic rise and fall of Europe's global hegemony during the period roughly
from 1450 to 1950. Among the major themes we will examine are: states and power, borders and
resistance, race and genocide, economies and oppression, ideas and revolution, the building and
change of hierarchies of gender and power. Truly, a dramatic story.
The objectives of the course are: 1) To serve as an introduction to the study of history for majors and
non-majors alike, and to teach the critical analysis of historical sources; 2) to teach substantive
knowledge of European history; 3) to provide a foundation for further study of the European past. No
previous background in European or World history is required.
040. Early Modern Europe, 1450-1750. (C) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Safley.
This course examines those European developments which contributed to the world we understand as
modern. Special emphasis will be placed on the transformation of Europe through the advent of new
technologies, the creation of a global economy, the consolidation of territorial states, the rise of
effective, central governments, the dissolution of religious unity, and the dialect between modern and
traditional world views.

Page 2 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
048. (RUSS048) The Rise and Fall of the Russian Empire, 1552-1917. (C) History & Tradition
Sector. All classes. Nathans/Holquist.
How and why did Russia become the center of the world's largest empire, a single state
encompassing eleven time zones and over a hundred ethnic groups? To answer this question, we will
explore the rise of a distinct political culture beginning in medieval Muscovy, its transformation under
the impact of a prolonged encounter with European civilization, and the various attempts to re-form
Russia from above and below prior to the Revolution of 1917. Main themes include the facade vs. the
reality of central authority, the intersection of foreign and domestic issues, the development of a radical
intelligentsia, and the tension between empire and nation.
049. (RUSS049) The Soviet Century, 1917-1991. (C) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Nathans/
Holquist.
Out of an obscure, backward empire, the Soviet Union emerged to become the great political
laboratory of the twentieth century. This course will trace the roots of the world's first socialist society
and its attempts to recast human relations and human nature itself. Topics include the origins of the
Revolution of 1917, the role of ideology in state policy and everyday life, the Soviet Union as the center
of world communism, the challenge of ethnic diversity, and the reasons for the USSR's sudden
implosion at the end of the century.Focusing on politics, society, culture, and their interaction, we will
examine the rulers (from Lenin to Gorbachev) as well as the ruled (peasants, workers, and
intellectuals; Russians and non-Russians). The course will feature discussions of selected texts,
including primary sources in translation.
050. England and the British Isles to 1707. (C) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Todd.
The subject of this course is the history of the British Isles from the Roman Conquest in 43AD to the
creation of the United Kingdom in 1707. Between these two dates the various societies and cultures in
the British Isles were brought into the orbit of the Roman Empire, converted to latin Christianity, and
developed distinctive cultures and strong ties with the Continent. From the twelfth century on, the
kingdom of England began to exert its power over Wales, Ireland, and Scotland, although English
power waxed and waned in these areas between the twelfth and the seventeenth centuries. The
Anglo-Norman continental empire of the Plantagenet dynasty also played a large part in shaping the
English monarchy, as did the playing out of the Hundred Years War, the internal divisions in fifteenthcentury English society, and the rise of the Tudor-Stuart dynasty.
051. MODERN BRITAIN, 1783-2000: EMPIRE, EXPANSION, AND DEMOCRACY. (C) History &
Tradition Sector. All classes. CHASE-LEVENSON.
This course surveys British history from the eighteenth century to the present. In two centuries, Britain
built an empire that ruled over a quarter of the globe and became the world's leading economy. In
2015, the Empire is gone, but coincident with its loss, Britain gained a welfare state and retained the a
role as a powerhouse of culture and finance. Themes emphasized in the course include national
identity, class, political reform, war, and imperial interaction. How did Britain come to dominate the
world economy and what did this dominance look like? How should we understand its role in the world
today? Do the Beatles, the Royal Family, and Amy Winehouse add up to a "Cool Britannia" that has
somehow "made up" for the loss of the Empire? Using written and visual primary sources, we'll look at
all of these questions as we study the birth and development of modern Britain.

Page 3 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
054. (COML052) Books that Made History. Moyer.
It is often said that books reflect the society in which they were written. Yet many books--and their
authors--shaped society, and changed how people understood the world around them. In this course
we will focus on a variety of texts from the world of Rome to 1600, the era in which European society
took form. In each case, we will seek not only to understand the work itself, but also how it affected the
lives and the thought of its readers. Works will range from Cicero and the Biblical New Testament to
Luther and Machiavelli.
055. Reading the Classics. Feros.
In this course we will study the early roots of Western culture--the Biblical, Greek and Roman
traditions--as well as how sixteenth- and seventeenth-century European authors reproduced,
rethought and reshaped these early traditions. Instead of reading and discussing the required texts
according to the date when they were written (first the early traditions and ending with the
Renaissance views), we will focus our attention on a few themes that were central concerns to those
living in Classic and Renaissance times, and that continue to influence modern ways of thinking and
acting in Western societies: conceptions of God and the place of religion in society; nature of power
and authority, and individuals' rights and duties; good, evil, and ethical philosophy; views on women,
their nature and roles in society; ethnography and the perception of other cultures and societies. In
addition to reading and discussing several of the biblical books--Genesis, Exodus, the Book on
Revelation--we will study other seminal classical works--Sophocles' Antigone, Aristotle's Politics and
Ethics, Herodotus' The Histories; Plato's Apology-- and works by Michel de Montaigne, Maria de Zayas
y Sotomayor, Marie de Gournay, Christopher Marlowe, William Shakespeare, and several others. We
will also work with books published in the last decades, analyzing the
classics and and their reception in various periods of history, but also books that analyze what the
classics tell us today--Dreyfus and Kelly's All things shining, Reading the Western Classics to find
meaning in a secular Age; Anthony Grafton's Bring Out Your Dead: the Past as Revelation; James
Miller, Examined Lives, from Socrates to Nietzsche; and Sarah Bakewell, How to Live: Or a Life of
Montaigne in One Question and Twenty Attempts at an Answer.
070. (AFRC070, LALS070) Colonial Latin America. (A) History & Tradition Sector. All classes.
Walker. Fulfills History & Tradition Distribution Requirement
This course provides an introduction to the broad literature on Latin America's rich colonial history. We
will begin by tracing some of the early origins of - and points of contact between - the Indian, Iberian,
and African men and women who formed the basis of colonial society. As the course progresses, we
will explore the variety of ways in which colonial subjects lived, worked, ate, worshipped, and
socialized. Lectures and reading assignments will draw upon a variety of sources, including court
cases, artistic renderings, city maps and street plans, travel accounts of visits to the regions, and the
material, cultural, and intellectual products made possible by the wealth and dynamism of the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The course will conclude with an analysis of the Age of
Revolutions, a period of dramatic upheaval that remains at the center of lively scholarly debates. By
the end of the semester, students will be able to engage the key questions driving these debates, the
most important of which, perhaps, is: what is Latin America's colonial legacy?
071. (LALS071) Latin American Survey 1782-Present. (B) History & Tradition Sector. All classes.
Farnsworth-Alvear.
Surveys Latin American and Caribbean history from the Tupac Amaru Revolt to the present. We will
examine the legacy of Spanish colonialism and slavery, movements for national and cultural
independence, twentieth-century radicalism, and the politics of race in contemporary Latin America.
Readings include fictional as well as analytical representations, and a film series will accompany the
course.

Page 4 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
072. (LALS072) Introduction to Latin American and Latino Studies. (A) Farnsworth-Alvear.
Designed to introduce students to the interdisciplinary field of Latin American and Latino Studies, this
is a seminar oriented toward first and second year students. Readings will range widely, from scholarly
work on the colonial world that followed from and pushed back against the "conquest"; to literary and
artistic explorations of Latin American identities; to social scientists' explorations of how Latinos are
changing the United States in the current generation.
075. (AFRC075, AFST075) Africa Before 1800. (B) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Babou.
Survey of major themes and issues in African history before 1800. Topics include: early civilizations,
African kingdoms and empires, population movements, the spread of Islam,and the slave trade. Also,
emphasis on how historians use archaeology, linguistics, and oral traditions to reconstruct Africa's
early history.
076. (AFRC076, AFST076) Africa Since 1800. (A) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Cassanelli.
Survey of major themes, events, and personalities in African history from the early nineteenth century
through the 1960s. Topics include abolition of the slave trade, European imperialism, impact of colonial
rule, African resistance, religious and cultural movements, rise of naturalism and pan-Africanism,
issues of ethnicity and "tribalism" in modern Africa.
081. (NELC031) History of the Middle East Since 1800. (A) History & Tradition Sector. All classes.
Kashani-Sabet/Troutt-Powell.
A survey of the modern Middle East with special emphasis on the experiences of ordinary men and
women as articulated in biographies, novels, and regional case studies. Issues covered include the
collapse of empires and the rise of a new state system following WWI, and the roots and
consequences of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, the Iranian revolution and the U.S.-Iraq War. Themes
include: the colonial encounter with Europe and the emergence of nationalist movements, the
relationship between state and society, economic development and international relations, and religion
and cultural identity.
093. (COML103, FOLK103, THAR103) Performing History. (C) St.George.
From medieval processions to the Mummers Parade, from military reenactments to Mardi Gras,
communities do more than "write" or "read" history in order to feel its power and shape their futures.
Drawing upon traditions in theater, spectacle, religion, and marketing, they also perform their history-by replaying particular characters, restaging pivotal events and sometimes even changing their
outcomes--in order to test its relevance to contemporary life and to both mark and contest ritual points
in the annual cycle. This course will explore diverse ways of "performing history" in different cultures,
including royal passages, civic parades, historical reenactments, community festivals, and film.

Page 5 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
084. (NELC032) Topics in 20th C. Middle East. (C) Kashani-Sabet.
If "the clash of civilizations" is the first image that jumps to mind when thinking about the modern
Middle East, then this is the course for you. From the familiar narratives about the creation of modern
nation-states to the oft-neglected accounts of cultural life, this course surveys the multi-faceted
societies of the twentieth-century Middle East. Although inclusive of the military battles and conflicts
that have affected the region, this course will move beyond the cliches of war and conflict in the Middle
East to show the range of issues and ideas with which intellectuals and governments grappled
throughout the century. The cultural politics and economic value of oil as well as the formation of a
vibrant literary life will be among the topics covered in the course. By considering illustrative cultural
moments that shed light on the political history of the period, this course will adopt a nuanced
framework to approach the Arab/Israeli conflict, the history of the Gulf States, the Iran-Iraq War, and
U.S. involvement in the region.
L/R 087. (ANTH063, SAST063) East&West: A Hitchhiker's Guide to the Cultural History of the
Modern World. (C) Humanities & Social Science Sector. Class of 2010 & beyond. Mitchell.
Sugar and Spices. Tea and Coffee. Opium and Cocaine. Hop aboard the Indian Ocean dhows,
Chinese junks, Dutch schooners, and British and American clipper ships that made possible the rise of
global capitalism, new colonial relationships, and the intensified forms of cultural change. How have
the desires to possess and consume particular commodities shaped cultures and the course of
modern history? This class introduces students to the cultural history of the modern world through an
interdisciplinary analysis of connections between East and West, South and North. Following the
circulation of commodities and the development of modern capitalism, the course examines the impact
of global exchange on interactions and relationships between regions, nations, cultures, and peoples
and the influences on cultural practices and meanings. The role of slavery and labor migrations,
colonial and imperial relations, and struggles for economic and political independence are also
considered.
Recitation will not meet every week. Lecture sessions will be shortened those weeks that
recitations are held.
091. (EALC071) Modern Japanese History. (C) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Dickinson.
This course will survey the major political, economic, social and intellectual trends in the making of
modern Japan. Special emphasis will be given to the turbulent relationship between state and society
from 1800 to the present.
096. (EALC041) Late Imperial China. (C) Fei.
This lecture course -- the first of a two-part sequence -- examines the history of late imperial China
through the early 19th century. We begin with the Song dynasty transformation: the rise of gentry
society and imperial absolutism, the institution of Confucian orthodoxy, the shift of the population and
the economic center of gravity to the south, the commercialization of the economy, and change in the
relative status of women and men. We then trace China's subsequent political and social history,
including the following themes: inner vs. outer court politics; law, government, and society; intellectuals
and political dissent; gender, family, and kinship practices; patterns of peasant life and rebellion;
traditional foreign relations and first contacts with the West; internal sources of the decline of imperial
order.

Page 6 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
097. (EALC047) History of Modern China. (C) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Fei.
From an empire to a republic, from communism to socialist-style capitalism, few countries have ever
witnessed so much change in a hundred year period as China during the twentieth century. How are
we to make sense out of this seeming chaos? This course will offer an overview of the upheavals that
China has experienced from the late Qing to the Post-Mao era, interspersed with personal
perspectives revealed in primary source readings such as memoirs, novels, and oral accounts. We will
start with an analysis of the painful transition from the last empire, the Qing Dynasty (1644-1911), to a
modern nation state, followed by exploration of a century-long tale of incessant reform and revolution.
The survey will focus on three main themes: 1) the repositioning of China in the new East Asian and
world orders; 2) the emergence of a modern Chinese state and nationalistic identity shaped and
reshaped by a series of cultural crises; and finally, 3) the development and transformation of Chinese
modernity.
Major historical developments include: the Opium War and drug trade in the age of imperialism,
reform and revolution, the Nationalist regime, Mao's China, the Cultural Revolution, and the ongoing
efforts of post-Mao China to move beyond Communism. We will conclude with a critical review of the
concept of "Greater China" that takes into account Taiwan, Hong Kong, and the Chinese diaspora in
order to attain a more comprehensive understanding of modern China, however defined, at the end of
the last century.
098. (EALC080) Introduction to Korean Civilization. (C) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Park.
This gateway course surveys the history of Korea from early times to the present. We will study the
establishment of various sociopolitical orders and their characteristics alongside major cultural
developments. Covered topics include: state formation and dissolution; the role of ideology and how it
changes; religious beliefs and values; agriculture, commerce, and industry; changing family relations;
responses to Western imperialism; and Korea's increasing presence in the modern world as well as its
future prospects. Students will also be introduced to various interpretive approaches in the
historiography. No prior knowledge of Korea or Korean language is presumed.

Freshman Seminars (101-106) and BFS Seminars (111-116) for Freshmen and
Sophomores.
These courses are open to a limited number of freshmen and, if space permits, to sophomores as
well. Topics vary each semester.
SM 101. (JWST103, RELS026) Freshman Seminar: Europe before 1800. (C) Staff.
SM 102. Freshman Seminar: Europe after 1800. (C) Staff.
SM 103. Freshman Seminar: America before 1800. (C) Staff.
SM 104. (AFRC015, AFRC103, ASAM013) Freshman Seminar: America after 1800. (C) Staff.
SM 105. (ANCH190, CLST190, EALC073) Freshman Seminar: The World before 1800. (C) Staff.
SM 106. (AFRC107, LALS107) Freshman Seminar: The World After 1800. (C)

Benjamin Franklin Seminars Topics vary each semester. Courses are mainly for freshmen and
sophomores in the Benjamin Franklin Scholars program. Other students need instructor's consent.
SM 111. Europe before 1800: Benjamin Franklin Seminar. (C) Staff.

Page 7 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
SM 112. Europe after 1800: Benjamin Franklin Seminar. (C) Staff.
SM 113. America before 1800: Benjamin Franklin Seminar. (C) Staff.
SM 114. America after 1800: Benjamin Franklin Seminar. (C) Staff.
SM 115. The World before 1800: Benjamin Franklin Seminar. (C) Staff.
SM 116. The World after 1800: Benjamin Franklin Seminar. (C) Staff.

Introductory Courses (100-level)
Topics vary each semester. Listings are posted outside the Department of History office during
advance registration. Enrollment is limited; history majors will be given priority in admission.
107. Comparative Capitalist Systems. (C) Humanities & Social Science Sector. Class of 2010 &
beyond. Drew.
The course follows the evolution of industrial capitalism since the beginning of the English industrial
revolution in the late 18th century. It ranges from the problems of the industrial revolution in England to
problems of building a market economy in eastern Europe today. In particular, it examines
industrialization and explores the sources of sustained economic growth from a comparative
perspective. Most of the world, especially in so-called emerging economies, is still confronted with the
challenge, and often pain, of creating a modern industrial capitalist society. The course attempts to
build a conceptual apparatus for understanding models of industrialization and is built around issues
such as law, anti-trust, corporate forms, banking institutions, industrial relations, etc. By definition, the
course tends to concentrate on successful industrializers around the world, but questions regarding
continuing underdevelopment will be addressed.
118. (ANTH118, GSWS119, RELS109) Witchcraft and Possession. (C) St.George.
This course explores world witchcraft and possession from the persecutions of the early seventeenth
century through the rise of Wicca in the twentieth century. The mere mention of these terms, or of such
close cousins as demonology, sorcery, exorcism, magic, and the witches Sabbath, raises clear
ethnographic and historical challenges. How can the analysis of witchcraft-- including beliefs, patterns
of accusation, the general social position of victims, the intensity and timing of witch hunts, and its
relation to religious practice, law, language, gender, social marginalization, and property--lead us to a
more humane understanding of belief and action? Films such as The Exorcist, The Blair Witch Project,
The Crucible, and Three Sovereigns for Sarah will focus discussion.
119. History of the Modern Business Corporation. (C) Drew.
Over the last two centuries, the modern corporation has emerged as the dominant form of doing
business throughout the world. As such, it not only effects people's daily lives, but also influences
government policies and larger trends in society. This course looks at the history of the international
corporation from the industrial revolution to the present, to consider how corporations have evolved
and the varying ways in which they have influenced the history of our times. We will consider the
fundamental debates surrounding the responsibility between shareholders, managers, workers,
customers, and most importantly, society as a whole. Much of the course will involve an examination of
case studies of individual companies, industries or issues, to understand how corporations have
functioned in specific instances.

Page 8 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
124. Economic History, 1600 to present. (C) Drew.
Economic affairs dominate much of our daily lives and an appreciation of how our economic world
evolved is essential for an intelligent understanding of today's society. This course will survey the
world's economic history from 1600 to the present. It will consider the evolution of government policies,
the growth of trade, business and industry, the economic inter-relationship between regions,
governments and business, and, of course, their effect on ordinary people's economic lives.
120. (EALC081) PREMODERN KOREA: PHILOSOPHERS, WARRIORS AND SLAVES. (C) History &
Tradition Sector. All classes. Park.
This course surveys the history of Korea from early times to 1800, focusing on the establishment of
various sociopolitical orders and their characteristics as well as major cultural developments. Covered
topics include: state formation and dissolution; status hierarchy and social mobility; the role of ideology
and how it changes; religious beliefs and values; agriculture, crafts and commerce; and changing
family relations and gender roles. Students will also be introduced to various interpretive approaches
in the historiography. No prior knowledge of Korea or Korean language is presumed. The course fulfills
the College's History and Tradition Sector and Cross Cultural Analysis requirements. For the History
major and minor, this course counts toward the pre-1800 and Asia requirements.
121. (EALC082) Modern Korea. (C) Park.
An examination of Korean society and culture in tumultuous transition, focusing on challenges for the
Choson Dynasty and its reform effort, presures imperialism, impact of Japanese colonial rule, conflict
between two rival regimes, South Korea's emergence as a major player in the international plitical
economy, some salient features of the totalitarian North Korean regime, triumph of democracy, and
Korea's place in the world.
123. Economic History of Europe I. (C) Humanities & Social Science Sector. Class of 2010 &
beyond. Safley.
This course concentrates on the economy of Europe in the Early Modern Period, 1450-1750. It was a
time of great transition. Europe developed from an agriculturally-based to an industrially-based
economy, with attendant changes in society and culture. From subsistence-level productivity, the
European economy expanded to create great surfeits of goods, with attendant changes in
consumption and expectation. Europe grew from a regional economic system to become part--some
would say the heart--of a global economy, with attendant changes in worldview and identity. Economic
intensification, expansion, globalization, and industrialization are our topics, therefore. Beginning with
economic organizations and practices, we will consider how these changed over time and influenced
society and culture. The course takes as its point of departure the experience of individual, working
men and women: peasants and artisans, merchants and landlords, entrepeneurs and financiers. Yet, it
argues outward: from the particular to the general, from the individual to the social, from the local to
the global. It will suggest ways in which the economy influenced developments or changes that were
not in themselves economic, shaped, and deflected economic life and practice.
126. Modern Europe, 1789-1919. (C) Chase-Levenson.
It's old, it's new. It's unfamiliar, it's recognizable. This course investigates the collapse of the "old
regime" and the birth of something like the Europe we recognize. The long nineteenth century
witnessed the development of political, economic, and cultural phenomena we often see as
characteristic of modern society. Topics considered include political revolution, industrialization,
liberalism, imperialism, and new ideologies of gender, race, and class. Our focus will be consistently
transnational. Where did Europe begin and end? How did borders and boundaries operate at the edge
of nations, but also within societies? We will investigate these questions as we follow European history
from the violence and optimism of the French Revolution to the chaos of the First World War.

Page 9 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
128. From Complete Destruction to Superpower: Europe 1945-2013. (C) Steinberg.
This course offers a survey of European history, including both eastern and western Europe since
World War II until the present. The course examines how Europe in all its complexity and cultures lived
under the shadow of the Cold War. It examines the origins and nature of the cold War, not just in its
diplomatic and political dimensions, but also its effects on the culture and people of Europe. It explores
the reasons for the phenomenon of anti-Americanism and the series of revolts exploding throughout
eastern Europe until the fall of the Berlin Wall. Finally, the course examines a number of thematic
areas about European political culture, immigration, decolonization, the 1960s revolts and the 1970s
terrorism, the resurgence of nationalism, but also the growth of the European community. The course
explores the question: what does it mean to be European?
130. History of Globalization. (C) Humanities & Social Science Sector. Class of 2010 & beyond.
Drew.
Globalization seems the essence of modernity, but it is not a new phenomena. The world has already
witnessed several eras of globalization, each of which transformed and changed the world in often
similar but sometime unique fashions. This course will look at continuing trends towards globalization
and consider its rich history and the contentious arguments that it has always provoked. Although the
focus of the course will be on globalization during the 19th and 20th centuries, we will also consider
earlier episodes of globalization, to fully appreciate its evolution and importance.
140. (JWST157, NELC052, RELS121) Medieval and Early Modern Jewry. (A) History & Tradition
Sector. All classes. Ruderman.
Exploration of intellectual, social, and cultural developments in Jewish civilization from the rise of Islam
in the seventh century to the assault on established conceptions of faith and religious authority in 17th
century Europe, that is, from the age of Mohammed to that of Spinoza. Particular attention will be paid
to the interaction of Jewish culture with those of Christianity and Islam.
135. (RUSS135) Cold War: Global History. (C) Humanities & Social Science Sector. Class of 2010 &
beyond. Nathans.
The cold War was more than simply a military confrontation between the United States and the Soviet
Union; it was the frame within which the entire world developed (for better or worse) for nearly five
decades. This course will examine the cold War as a global phenomenon, covering not only the
military and diplomatic history of the period, but also examining the social and cultural impact of the
superpower confrontation. We will cover the origins of the conflict, the interplay between periods of
tension and detente, the relative significance of disagreements within the opposing blocs, and the
relationship between the "center" of the conflict in the North Atlantic/European area and the global
"periphery".
137. International Society in the Twentieth Century. (C) Ogle.
Is the world evolving toward a global civil society, and perhaps toward global government? The course
explores this question across the 20th century, focusing on the origins and evolution of transnational
organizations and movements. We will analyze a variety of actors above and below the level of the
nation-state, from the League of Nations to Amnesty International. At the same time we will pay careful
attention to the many countervailing forces that have resisted the process of globalization: various
forms of nationalism, local ethnic and religious movements in places as far-flung as Central Africa and
Northern Ireland, and struggles over territories and border control from Arizona to Kashmir. We will
look at the long history of contention between these opposing trajectories, exploring such topics as
Wilsonianism and its reception in Europe and beyond, transnational human rights norms, the
environmentalist movement, institutions designed to deal with global threats such as the World Health
Organization or the International Atomic Energy Agency, European integration, political Islam, and the
War on Terror.

Page 10 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
139. (JWST156, NELC051, NELC451, RELS120) Jews and Judaism in Antiquity. (B) History &
Tradition Sector. All classes. Dohrmann.
A broad introduction to the history of Jewish civilization from its Biblical beginnings to the Middle Ages,
with the main focus on the formative period of classical rabbinic Judaism and on the symbiotic
relationship between Judaism, Christianity, and Islam.
141. (JWST158, NELC053, RELS122) Jews in the Modern World. (B) History & Tradition Sector. All
classes. Wenger.
This course offers an intensive survey of the major currents in Jewish culture and society from the late
middle ages to the present. Focusing upon the different societies in which Jews have lived, the course
explores Jewish responses to the political, socio-economic, and cultural challenges of
modernity.Topics to be covered include the political emancipation of Jews, the creation of new religious
movements within Judaism, Jewish socialism, Zionism, the Holocaust, and the emergence of new
Jewish communities in Israel and the United States. No prior background in Jewish history is expected.
L/R 146. (HSOC145, STSC145) Comparative Medicine. (C) History & Tradition Sector. All classes.
Mukharji.
See primary department (HSOC) for a complete course description.
147. (AFST147, NELC187) Islamic History to 1517. (C) Staff.
This course consists of an overview of the history of the major Islamic dynasties which ruled over the
Middle East and North Africa from the beginning of the "Islamic Empire" to 1517 A.D.
150. (JWST130, JWST430, RELS124) American Jewish Experience. (C) Wenger.
This course offers a comprehensive survey of American Jewish history from the colonial period to the
present. It will cover the different waves of Jewish immigration to the United States and examine the
construction of Jewish political, cultural, and religious life in America. Topics will include: American
Judaism, the Jewish labor movement, Jewish politics and popular culture, and the responses of
American Jews to the Holocaust and the State of Israel.
153. (URBS104) Transformation of Urban America: From the Mid-Twentieth Century to the
Present. (C) Society Sector. All classes. Fairbanks.
The course traces the economic, social, and political history of American cities after World War II. It
focuses on how the economic problems of the industrial city were compounded by the racial conflicts
of the 1950s and 1960s and the fiscal crises of the 1970s. The last part of the course examines the
forces that have led to the revitalization of cities in recent years.
155. (ASAM003) Introduction to Asian American History. (C) History & Tradition Sector. All classes.
Azuma.
This course will provide an introduction to the history of Asian Pacific Americans, focusing on the wide
diversity of migrant experiences, as well as the continuing legacies of Orientalism on American-born
APA's. Issues of race, class, gender, and sexuality will also be examined.

Page 11 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
156. (SAST166) History of Jewish Civilization I: From Biblical Period to Early Middle Ages. (C)
Goldenberg.
A broad introduction to the history of Jewish civilization from its Biblical beginnings until the Middle
Ages, with the main focus on the formative period of classical rabbinic Judaism and on the symbiotic
relationship between Judaism,Christianity, and Islam.
163. Modern American Culture. (C) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Peiss.
Through the twentieth century, American culture took on new forms and meanings, spurred by
technological innovation, commerce, and institutions, and shaped by an ever-changing population. In
the process, American culture became self-consciously 'modern'-embraced, contested, repudiated,
and continually redefined. This course explores the history of American culture from the 1890s to the
1990s, with a focus on the following questions: Why did culture become such an important part of
American economic, social, and political life in the twentieth century? How has culture been created,
understood, and mobilized by different groups in American society at different times? What have been
the politics of culture over the twentieth century? Topics include the rise of 'culture industries' and
mass entertainment, including amusement parks, film, radio, and television; the growth of consumer
culture; the impact of gender in such arenas as sports and fashion; the role of working-class peoples,
African Americans, and immigrants in American culture; the cultural response to the Depression and
World War II; and popular activism. The course emphasizes the study of primary documentsjournalism, fiction, letters and diaries, music, photographs, and film-as a means of understanding the
past.
159. Technology, Policy & War. (C) Waldron.
Comparative and interdisciplinary examination of successful and failed uses of force in international
relations, from ancient to modern times, using case studies. Readings will include Clausowitz, Sun
Tzu, and a variety of primary and secondary sources for the wars considered each year. Issues of
war's fundamental origins, and its many impacts on society, will also be considered.
160. Strategy, Policy and War.. (C) Waldron.
Analysis of the political use of force, both in theory and in practice, through analytical readings and
study of selected wars. Readings include Sun Zi, Kautilya, Machiavelli, Clauseqitz and other
strategists. Case studies vary but may include the Peloponnesian War, the Mongol conquests, the
Crusades, the Crimean War, Russo-Japanese War, World War II, Korea, or the Falklands, among
others, with focus on initiation, strategic alternatives, decision and termination. Some discussion of the
law of war and international attempts to limit it.
161. (ECON014) American Capitalism. (C) Society Sector. All classes. Licht.
A broad overview of American economic history will be provided by focusing on the following topics:
colonial trade patterns, the growth of the market economy, the political economy of slavery, industrial
expansion, segmentation in the labor force and changes in work, technological and organizational
innovations, business cycles, the rise of the corporate welfare state, the growth of monopoly
capitalism, and current economic problems in historical perspective.

Page 12 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
164. Recent American History. (C) Licht.
This course examines major developments in United States history since the Great Depression, a
tumultuous period that gave birth to many of our contemporary debates about the responsibilities of
government, the possiblity of radical social change, and the meaning of citizenship. Reading primary
documents alongside historical accounts, we will address the building of the New Deal state; the
emergence of the United States as a superpower; the domestic and international repercussions of the
Cold War; the impact of mass consumption, suburbanization, and new technologies; the civil rights
movement and other drives for social change; the cultural and political fallout of the Vietnam War;
transformations in gender roles and the family; and the end of the "American century."
165. (CINE167) HOLLYWOOD & AMER HISTORY. (C)
This course examines crucial events in American history, from the Puritans to the present, through the
lens of Hollywood film and other media. We will consider how these visual representations have
influenced our present understanding ofkey matters such as the Constitution, presidential politics,
Protestant religion, racial tensions, and war-making. Material to be viewed includes The Patriot,
Gettysburg, Gold Diggers of 1933, The Best Years of Our Lives, West Side Story, and Guess Who's
Coming to Dinner?
166. (CINE166) Arabic/Israeli Conflict in Literature and Film. (C) Troutt-Powell.
This course will explore the origins, the history and, most importantly, the literary and cinematic art of
the struggle that has endured for a century over the region that some call the Holy Land, some call
Eretz Israel and others call Palestine. We will also consider religious motivations and interpretations
that have inspired many involved in this conflict as well as the political consequences of world wars
that contributed so greatly to the reconfiguration of the Middle East after the fall of the Ottoman
Empire, and after the revelations of the Holocaust in Western Europe. While we will rely on a textbook
for historical grounding. the most significant material we will use to learn this history will be films,
novels, and short stories. Can the arts lead us to a different understanding of the lives lived through
what seems like unending crisis?
168. (AFRC168) History of American Law to 1877. (A) Berry.
The course surveys the development of law in the U.S. to 1877, including such subjects as: the
evolution of the legal profession, the transformation of English law during the American Revolution, the
making and implementation of the Constitution, and issues concerning business and economic
development, the law of slavery, the status of women, and civil rights.
169. (AFRC169) History of American Law Since 1877. (B) Berry.
This course covers the development of legal rules and principles concerning individual and group
conduct in the United States since 1877. Such subjects as regulation and deregulation, legal
education and the legal profession, and the legal status of women and minorities will be discussed.

Page 13 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
174. (LALS174) Reform and Revolution in the Americas. (C) History & Tradition Sector. All classes.
Offner.
The United States and Latin America produced a remarkable series of revolutions and reforms during
the postwar period. This course examines efforts in the United States, Guatemala, Cuba, and Brazil to
define and address problems around land, labor, and property; nation, empire, and autonomy; and
racism, democracy, and citizenship. In studying the US and Latin America together, the class invites
students to explore central themes of both regions' histories as parts of global processes. We will
explore exchanges between social movements in the US, Cuba and Africa, for instance, ask how ideas
about poverty traversed national borders, and examine the global rise of human rights consciousness.
The class, in other words, not only compares national histories but analyzes the relationships between
national upheavals and the global significance of events in the hemisphere.
170. (AFRC172) The American South. (D) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. McCurry.
Southern culture and history from 1607-1860, from Jamestown to seccession. Traces the rise of
slavery and plantation society, the growth of Southern sectionalism and its explosion into Civil War.
171. The American South 1860-Present. (D) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Hahn.
This course will trace the history of the American South from the end of the Civil War to the present. It
will investigate Reconstruction, the New South, Populism, racial disfranchisement and the rise of Jim
Crow, the politics of the One-Party South, the South in the Progressive era and its role in the New
Deal and World War II, the Civil Rights Movement of the 1950s and 1960s, and the rise of the
Republican South. While following the narrative of politics and economic development,we will pay
particular attention to race relations and will be more than casually interested in gender roles. In
addition, we will take frequent peeks at the evolving Southern identity as reflected in popular culture
and literature as well as in other corners of the public sphere.
172. Native People of Eastern North America. (C) Richter.
This course surveys Native American life east of the Mississippi River from earliest times to the
present. The diverse histories of Native peoples will be examined both on their own terms and as
continuing elements of the continent's broader story. Topics to be addressed include 16th- and 17thcentury demographic, economic, and social consequences of contact with European peoples, 18th
century strategies of resistance and accommodation to colonial powers, 19th-century impacts of U.S.
government removal and cultural assimilation policies, and 20th-century cultural and political
developments among the region's surviving Native American communities.
175. (AFRC175, LALS175) Society and Culture in Brazil. (C) Walker.
With its booming economy, the recent inauguration of its first female president, and its selection as
host to the 2012 World Cup and Olympic games, Brazil is growing in global prestige. But amid all these
exciting developments are devastating socioeconomic inequalities. Access to safe living conditions,
livable wages, higher education, and overall social mobility remain painfully out of reach to many
Brazilians, the majority of whom are the descendants of slaves. Why do these problems persist in a
country that has had such an enduring and widespread reputation as a "racial democracy"? What are
the possibilities of closing the equality gap in Brazil?
To answer these and other questions, our course takes a long and expansive view of Brazilian
history. We begin with an exploration of Brazil's early formation as a Portuguese colony in the sixteenth
century before moving on to tracing its development as one of the largest and longest-lasting
slaveholding societies in the world. From there we will examine the gradual process of abolition in the
region, the transition to an independent republic in the nineteenth century, as well as the nationbuilding projects and political crises of the twentieth century. We will conclude with an analysis of the
major issues shaping modern Brazilian soicety and culture.

Page 14 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
176. (AFRC176) Afro-American History 1550-1876. (D) History & Tradition Sector. All classes.
STAFF.
This course will study the history of Afro-Americans from their first encounter with Europeans in the
16th century to emancipation during the Civil War. The course will concentrate on the variety of black
responses to capture, enslavement, and forced acculturation in the New World. The difference in the
slave experience of various New World countries, and the methods of black resistance and rebellion to
varied slave systems will be investigated. The nature and role of the free black communities in
antebellum America will also be studied.
177. (AFRC177) Afro-American History 1876 to Present. (D) History & Tradition Sector. All classes.
Savage.
A study of the major events, issues, and personalities in Afro-American history from Reconstruction to
the present. It will also examine the different slave experiences and the methods of black resistance
and rebellion in the various slave systems.
178. (LALS178) The Foundations of the Early Modern Atlantic World 1450-1800. (C) Feros.
The purpose of this course is to provide students with a solid knowledge of Atlantic history during the
early modern period (XV-XVIII centuries). Through readings of primary and secondary texts we will
discuss the cultural, religious, intellectual, and economic developments of Europe, Africa, and the
Americas, as well as the connections, struggles, and mutual influences between the peoples of these
three continents. Throughout the semester we will study several important topics: medieval precedents
of early modern expansion; theories of empire; ideologies and systems of conquest and
colonialization; the relevance of race and slavery to the understanding of the early modern Atlantic
world; how different peoples perceived others and themselves; how European imperialism and
colonialization affected the internal development of Africa and America; the role played by religion in
the Atlantic world; persistence and continuity of Native cultures and beliefs during an age of
expansion; the creation of new identities; the role played by African nations in the creation of the
Atlantic world; and the creation of an Atlantic economy.
SM 201. (COML207, ITAL200, JWST201, RELS233) Major Seminar in History: Europe Before
1800. (C) Staff.
179. (LALS179, ROML250) The Rise and Fall of the Spanish Empire 1450-1700. (C) History &
Tradition Sector. All classes. Feros.
This course will provide students with a solid knowledge of the history of early modern Spain
(1450-1700). Through readings of primary and secondary texts that offer a complex vision of the
cultural, religious, intellectual, and economic contexts and processes, students will be able to
appreciate the intricacies of Spain's historical evolution. The course focuses on the rise and decline of
the Spanish monarchy: the conditions that enabled Spain to become the most powerful monarchy in
early modern times, and the conditions that led to its decline. This course also touches upon other
important aspects critical to understanding early modern Spain: relationships among Christians,
Muslims, and Jews in the Iberian Peninsula; the conquest and colonization of the New World; and
early modern debates about Spain's rights to occupy America and the so-called "destruction of the
Indies."

Page 15 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
188. (NELC188, SOCI231) Revolutions in the Middle East: Mass Movements & Contemporary
Politics in the Middle East and North Africa. (C) Kashani-Sabet.
Ideas play an intangible role in defining culture and politics. In the contemporary Middle East, mass
movements and revolutions have become a familiar feature of social and political life. This course
surveys some of the major revolutions and ideologies that have caused significant change in the
Middle East over the last century. We will examine icons of imperialism and consider varying sources
of conflict within and between states. Novels, essays, and secondary works will comprise the bulk of
the readings. The weekly assignments will focus on particular themes or on works that show the
nature of political change in various contexts and geographic settings. Thematic texts will be
supplemented with some factual information to help the students put the ideas of revolt and protest in
the proper historical context.
189. (NELC139) Modern Egypt. (C) Troutt-Powell.
This course will seek to explore how Egyptian culture has dealt with its many pasts by investigating
early modern and modern Egyptian history.With an emphasis on the 18th century to the present we
will explore the culture of Egypt under the Ottoman Empire, slavery in Egypt, the unsuccessful French
attempt to colonize Egypt and the successful British occupation of the country.

Seminar in History (201-206)
Topics vary each seminar. Listings are available from the Department of History office during advance
registration, and at all times on the Web at http://www.history.upenn.edu. Enrollment is limited; history
majors will be given priority in admission.
SM 202. Major Seminar in History: Europe After 1800. (C) Staff.
SM 203. (GSWS203) Major Seminar in History: America Before 1800. (C) Staff.
SM 204. (AFRC205, GSWS204, JWST204, LALS204, URBS227) Major Seminar in History:
America After 1800. (C) Staff.
SM 205. (JWST205, LALS205, NELC235) Major Seminar in History: The World before 1800. (C)
Staff.
SM 206. Major Seminar of the World after 1800. (C) Staff.

Advanced Benjamin Franklin Seminars Topics vary each semester. Courses are mainly for
juniors and seniors in the Benjamin Franklin Scholars program. Other students need instructor's
consent.
SM 211. (FREN360) Europe before 1800: Advanced Benjamin Franklin Seminar. (C) Staff.
SM 212. (ITAL200) Europe after 1800: Advanced Benjamin Franklin Seminar. (C) Staff.
SM 213. America before 1800: Advanced Benjamin Franklin Seminar. (C) Staff.
SM 214. (AFRC215, GSWS214, JWST214, URBS220) America after 1800: Advanced Benjamin
Franklin Seminar. (C) Staff.
SM 215. The World before 1800: Advanced Benjamin Franklin Seminar. (C) Staff.

Page 16 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
SM 216. (NELC286) The World after 1800: Advanced Benjamin Franklin Seminar. (C) Staff.

Intermediate Courses (220-397)
SM 209. (URBS103) Industrial Metropolis. (A) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Vitiello.
Although we no longer think of most U.S. cities as industrial cities, metropolitan areas today are all
products of industrial economies, technologies, and social systems. This course explores the
industrialization and deindustrialization of American cities within their evolving global context from the
era of European colonization to the present. It includes weekly readings and discussion, regular
response papers and walking tours, in- class exercises, and a research paper using primary sources.
Themes include energy and ecology, labor and production, inner city and suburban development,
globalization, and economic restructuring. Ultimately, the class aims to give students a broad
knowledge of 1) the history of industrial capitalism, 2) its effects on cities and regions over the past
three centuries, and 3) analytical tools for understanding the past, present, and future of metropolitan
economies, geography, and society.
SM 230. (CLST230, COML248, GRMN232, ITAL230, JWST230) Topics in European History. (C)
Staff.
Topics vary
219. (COML235, RUSS234, SLAV517) Medieval Russia: Origins of Russian Cultural Identity. (M)
Verkholantsev.
This course offers an overview of the cultural history of Rus from its origins to the eighteenth century,
a period which laid the foundation for the Russian Empire. The course takes an interdisciplinary
approach to the evolution of the main cultural paradigms of Russian Orthodoxy viewed in a broader
European context. Although this course is historical in content, it is also about modern Russia. The
legacy of Medieval Rus is still referenced, often allegorically, in contemporary social and cultural
discourse as the Russian, Ukrainian and Belarusian societies attempt to reconstruct and reinterpret
their histories. In this course, students learn that the study of the medieval cultural and political history
explains many aspects of modern Russian society, its culture and mentality.
SM 220. (COML220, RUSS220) RUSSIA AND THE WEST. (M)
SM 227. (SAST163) Topics in S. Asian Hist. (C)
SM 231. (AFRC229, ASAM203, ENGL253, JWST215, RELS209) Topics in US History. (C) Staff.
Topics in US History
SM 232. (AFRC233, AFST232, CINE233, NELC282) World History: Africa or the Middle East. (A)
Staff.
Topics vary
SM 233. (AFRC234, ARTH369, EALC141, GSWS233, LALS233) World History: East Asia or Latin
America. (A) Staff.
Topics Vary

Page 17 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
275. (AFRC274, AFST274) Islam and Society in Africa. (C) Babou.
This course is designed to provide the students with a broad understanding of the history of Islam in
Africa. The focus will be mostly on West Africa, but we will also look at developments in other regions
of the continent. We will examine the process of islamization in Africa and the interplay between Islam
and the African traditional religions and customs. Topics include conversion, Islamic education and
literacy, the status of women, Muslim response to European colonial domination, Islamic mysticism,
and the contemporary development of Sunni movements.
276. (EALC176) Japan: The Age of the Samuri. (C) Hurst.
This course deals with the samurai in Japanese history and culture and will focus on the period of
samurai political dominance from 1185 to 1868, but it will in fact range over the whole of Japanese
history from the development of early forms of warfare to the disappearance of the samurai after the
Meiji Restoration of the 19th century. The course will conclude with a discussion of the legacy of the
samurai in modern Japanese culture and the image of the samurai in foreign perceptions of Japan.
277. (EALC270) Tpcs in Premod Jap History.
308. Renaissance Europe. (C) Moyer.
This course will examine the cultural and intellectual movement known as the Renaissance, from its
origins in fourteenth-century Italy to its diffusion into the rest of Europe in the sixteenth century. We will
trace the great changes in the world of learning and letters, the visual arts, and music,along with those
taking place in politics, economics, and social organization. We will be reading primary sources as well
as modern works.
309. Age of Reformation. (C) Safley.
The Protestant Reformation of the 16th century was a watershed in European history. It marked the
culmination of centuries of religious, political and social change and had profound institutional and
intellectual consequences. We will examine the central teachings and activities of the Protestant
reformers against this broad background. Topics will include: medieval traditions of religious protest
and reform; social and political changes in the period of the Reformation; the changing role of the
Papacy; and the impact of the new technology of printing. Readings will be both primary texts and
secondary sources and discussions will be an integral part of the class.
310. Europe in the Age of Baroque. (C) Safley.
The baroque earns its name from a style of art and architecture, developed in Europe between 1550
and 1700 and typified by elaborate ornamentation and color.The term can be applied well to the
history of the period, which was characterized by conflict and complexity.

Page 18 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
312. Britain's Century of Revolution. (C) Todd.
England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland experienced revolutions in the first half of the seventeenth
century that abolished monarchy and hereditary aristocracy, and carried out the first judicial execution
of a monarch in European history. England was re-constructed as a republic, then with Scotland
became the United Commonwealth of Great Britain, then declined into a military dictatorship, and
finally invited the king back. In 1688, however, the Glorious Revolution deposed that king and declared
Britain a strictly constitutional monarchy. This course will explore what motivated ordinarily obedient
British subjects to take up arms against their rulers. The works of Milton and Marvell, Cromwell,
Hobbes and Locke, and many lesser-known writers of diaries, autobiographies, sermons, statutes, and
letters will illuminate the issues. The focus will be on how law, politics and religion interacted in the
onset of war and defining of settlement, but with an eye to the larger social and cultural setting in
which revolutions happened: this is also an era of both witchcraze and scientific revolution, puritanism
and the slave trade, the near-destruction of London by fire and plague and its re-birth as the capital of
a commercial empire.
323. (FOLK323) Material Life in America, 1600-1800. (C) St. George.
This course will explore the history of America's use and fascination with material goods between
1600 and 1860. We will examine such issues as the transferal of European traditions of material
culture to the New World, the creation of American creolized forms, the impact of reformers in the late
eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, and the development of regional landscapes. Thematic
issues will include consumerism, objects as symbolic communication and metaphor, and the
complementary issues of archaeology and history of art in material culture study.
314. Victorian Britain: Spaces, Places, and Pests. (M) Chase-Levenson.
In this course, we will examine the nooks and crannies of Victorian society. It was a period of squalor,
but also innovation, devastating diseases, and crucial advances in public health and medical science.
Its cities featured depressing slums and lurid crimes, but also new kinds of spectacles, entertainments,
and commodities. It was, in many ways, as one of its greatest authors wrote, "the best of times, and
the worst of times." Units under study will include "The Docks," "The Germs," "The Empire," "The
Church," and "the Museum." We'll investigate killer diseases like cholera and typhus, dazzling
buildings like the Crystal Palace, imperial wars and crises, and new scientific movements like
Darwinism and mesmerism. Along the way, we will encounter proper and eminent Victorians as well as
scandalous and marginalized ones. The aim will be to understand Victorian mentalities and ideas by
looking at a diverse array of institutions and inventions. Readings will include novels, stories,
pamphlets, essays, and cartoons as well as secondary literature. Classes will be a mixture of lecture
and discussion, and no previous experience in British history is necessary.
318. (ITAL318) Italian History from Napoleon to Berlusconi. (M) Steinberg.
The seminar looks at the evolution of modern Italy from the Napoleonic Era through the unification of
the Kingdom in 1861, through its crisis in the First World War and the subsequent struggle for control
of the new mass society. It looks at the emergence of the first fascist regime and the first modern
dictatorship under Benito Mussolini; the rise and consolidation of that dictatorship, its descent into antiSemitism, defeat in war and the civil war of 1943-45.
SM 320. (HSOC279, STSC279) Nature's Nation: Americans and their Environment. (C) Greene.
Environmental history studies the interactions between humans and the natural world. In this kind of
study, mosquitoes and rain are actors in history as well as humans and their impact. This course
explores these interactions through case studies and topics nationally and globally, such as energy,
disease, human migration and settlement, animals, technological changes, urban and suburban
development, conservation and politics. This course is geared toward students who want to think about
how history happens, in different placaes and over time.

Page 19 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
331. American Diplomatic History Since 1776. (C) McDougall.
Survey course tracing the origins and evolution of the great traditions of U.S. foreign policy, including
Exceptionalism, Unilateralism, Manifest Destiny, Wilsonianism, etc., by which Americans have tried to
define their place in the world. Three hours of lecture per week, extensive reading, no recitations.
333. (COML236, RUSS240) Napoleonic Era & Tolstoy. (C) Holquist/Vinitsky.
In this course we will read what many consider to be the greatest book in world literature. This work,
Tolstoys War and Peace, is devoted to one of the most momentous periods in world history, the
Napoleonic Era (1789-1815). We will study both the novel and the era of the Napoleonic Wars: the
military campaigns of Napoleon and his opponents, the grand strategies of the age, political intrigues
and diplomatic betrayals, the ideologies and human dramas, the relationship between art and history.
How does literature help us to understand this era? How does history help us to understand this great
novel?
This semester marks the 200th anniversary of Napoleons attempt to conquer Russia and achieve
world domination, the campaign of 1812. Come celebrate this Bicentennial with us! Because we will
read War and Peace over the course of the entire semester, readings will be manageable and very
enjoyable.
341. Tudor England. (C) Todd.
This course examines the history of England from the accession of Henry (VII) Tudor in 1485 to the
death of Elizabeth I in 1603, with emphases on the political and personal history of this colorful
dynasty, the religious revolution known as the protestant Reformation, the arts and literature known as
the English Renaissance, imperial and trade ventures overseas, and aspects of popular culture
including the witch craze. Unlike most English histories of the period, we will also look closely at the
other realms of the British Isles, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland. Readings consist of a textbook with a
British scope, and an array of primary sources, some in book form and others (marked with an asterisk
on the syllabus) attached to Blackboard or distributed in class. Books are available at the Penn Book
Center, except for biographies associated with film critiques. Most of the films noted in the syllabus will
be available on PVN; otherwise, they can be viewed at the library or through Netflix. Assignments in
square brackets are optional.
342. (COML342) European Intellectual History, 1300-1600. (C) Moyer.
This course will examine the formation of European traditions of scholarship and letters, including
medieval, Renaissance and early modern writings. Topics will include court literature and romance;
scholastic thought and university scholarship; political thought; the humanist tradition. It will consider
the rise of printing, the formation of the "republic of letters," and the development of popular literature.
344. (COML344) Twentieth Century European Intellectual History. (B) Breckman.
European intellectual and cultural history from 1870 to 1950. Themes to be considered include
aesthetic modernism and the avant-garde, the rebellion against rationalism and positivism, Social
Darwinism, Second International Socialism, the impact of World War One on European intellectuals,
psychoanalysis, existentialism, and the ideological origins of fascism. Figures to be studied include
Nietzsche, Freud, Woolf, Sartre, Camus, and Heidegger.

Page 20 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
343. (COML343) Nineteenth Century European Intellectual History. (C) Breckman.
Starting with the dual challenges of Enlightenment and Revolution at the close of the eighteenth
century, this course examines the emergence of modern European thought and culture in the century
from Kant to Nietzsche. Themes to be considered include Romanticism, Utopian Socialism, early
Feminism, Marxism, Liberalism, and Aestheticism. Readings include Kant, Hegel, Burke, Marx, Mill,
Wollstonecraft, Darwin, Schopenhauer, and Nietzsche.
345. (AFRC345, GSWS345) Sinners, Sex and Slaves: Race and Sex in Early America. (A) Brown.
This course explores the lost worlds of sinners, witches, sexual offenders, rebellious slaves, and
Native American prophets from the seventeenth to nineteenth centuries. Using the life stories of
unusual individuals from the past, we try to make sense of their contentious relationships with their
societies. By following the careers of the trouble-makers, the criminals, and the rebels, we also learn
about the foundations of social order and the impulse to reform that rocked American society during
the nineteenth century.
346. (AFRC346, GSWS346) Gender in Modern American History. (B) Peiss.
This course explores how immigration, industrialization, racial segregation, and the growing authority
of science transformed the fundamental conditions of women's lives in the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries. Building on previous effforts by female reformers to perfect society, women at the
turn of the century organized large social movements dedicated to improving the lives of women and
children and gaining public access to political power. We will examine the fruits of this activism as well
as the consequences of subsequent events for the rise of several important social movements in the
latter half of the century -- including civil rights, women's liberation, and gay rights -- in which women
played a vital role. The course concludes with an assessment of feminism in the present day, with
special emphasis on the responses of younger women to its legacy.
349. (GSWS349) History of Sexuality in the U.S.. (C) Peiss.
This course introduces students to a relatively new field of inquiry, the history of sexuality in the U.S. It
explores the past to consider why sexuality has been so central to American identities, culture, and
politics. Primary documents and other readings focus on the history of sexual ideology and regulation;
popular culture and changing sexual practices; the emergence of distinct sexual identities and
communities; the politics of sexuality; and the relationship between sexual and and other forms of
social difference, such as gender, race, ethnicity, age, and class. Topics include many with continuing
relevance to contemporary public debate: among them, sexual representation and censorship, sexual
violence, adolescent sexuality, the politics of reproduction, gay and lesbian sexualities and sexually
transmitted diseases.
353. (AFRC353) Slavery, Race & Revolution in the Atlantic World. (M) Hahn.
This course will explore the role of peoples of African descent in the making and transformation of the
Atlantic world between the revolutionary era of the late 18th century, which saw the establishment of
the first black republic in the Western Hemisphere, and the early decades of the 20th century, when a
new pan-African consciousness emerged. We will look at the roles that slavery and the slave trade
played in marking the boundaries of a black Atlantic, and we will pay special attention to the part that
people of African descent played both in struggles against slavery in the Americas and in the struggles
to define the meanings of freedom and peoplehood there and elsewhere.

Page 21 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
354. (ASAM354) American Expansion in the Pacific. (C) Azuma.
This class will focus on America's expansion into the Pacific around the turn of the century with the
acquisition of Hawaii and the Phillipines. It can deal with various issues, including the meaning of
"frontier," colonialism, development of capitalist economies in the region, diplomacy, racism, migration,
an American brand of Orientalism in encountering the "natives" and "heathens,"and histories of the
West and the Pacific Islands in general.
362. (LAW 553) Law in American Life. Gordon.
SM 370. (AFST332, AFST533, NELC332, NELC632) North Africa: History, Culture, Society. (B)
Sharkey.
This interdisciplinary seminar aims to introduce students to the countries of North Africa, with a focus
on the Maghreb and Libya (1830-present). It does so while examining the region's close economic and
cultural connections to sub-Saharan Africa, Europe, and the Middle East. Readings will include
histories, political analyses, anthropological studies, and novels, and will cover a wide range of topics
such as colonial and postcolonial experiences, developments in Islamic thought and practice, and
labor migration. This class is intended for juniors, seniors, and graduate students.
373. (URBS217) America in the 1960s. (A) Sugrue.
This course examines the political, cultural, and intellectual history of America between 1954 and
1974. It considers the civil rights movement, the New Frontier and Great Society, the Supreme Court
and right politics, the rise of the New Right, the debate over Vietnam, student radicalism, sexual
liberation movements, black power, the counterculture, the urban crisis, and white backlash. The
course emphasizes the transformation of liberalism and the revitalization of conservatism, and the
tensions between integration and separatism, between libertarianism and communitarianism that
shaped the social movements of the sixties.
SM 371. (AFRC372, AFST373, NELC334) Africa and the Mid-East. (C) Troutt-Powell.
This seminar will explore the historical relationship between these two regions from the early modern
age to the present. We will examine the history of trade, particularly the slave trade, and its cultural
and political legacy. We will compare the experiences of European imperalism--how the scramble for
Africa dovetailed with the last decades of the Ottoman Empire--with an eye to how this shaped
nationalist movements in both regions. The course will also explore the decades of independence with
a special eye towards pan-Africanism and pan-Arabism. We will also study the ramifications of the
Arab-Israeli conflict on the relationship between African and Middle-Eastern countries, from Uganda to
Ethiopia, from OPEC to Darfur. The course will pay close attention to migrations through the regions,
whether forced or economic or religious. Whenever possible we will explore, through film and literature,
how people in Africa and the Middle East see their connections, and their differences.
372. (AFST372, AFST542, HIST542) The History of Foreign Aid to Africa. (C)
Cassanelli.Prerequisite(s): AFST/HIST 076, AFST 190, or AFST 256.
This course examines the history, politics, and significance of foreign aid to Africa since the late 19th
century. While we do not typically think about the European colonial period in Africa in terms of 'foreign
aid,' that era introduced ideas and institutions which formed the foundations for modern aid policies
and practices. So we start there and move forward into more contemporary times. In addition to
examining the objectives behind foreign assistance and the intentions of donors and recipients, we will
look at some of the consequences (intended or unintended) of various forms of foreign aid to Africa
over the past century. While not designed to be a comprehensive history of development theory, of
African economics, or of international aid organizations, the course will touch on all of these topics.
Previous course work on Africa is strongly advised.

Page 22 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
380. (JWST380, RELS320) Modern Jewish Intellectual and Cultural History. (C) Ruderman.
An overview of Jewish intellectual and cultural history from the late 18th century until the present. The
course considers the Jewish enlightenment Reform, Conservative and Neo-Orthodox Judaism, Zionist
and Jewish Socialist thought, and Jewish thought in the 20th century, particularly in the context of the
Holocaust. Readings of primary sources including Mendelsohn, Geiger, Hirsch, Herzl, Achad-ha-Am,
Baeck, Buber, Kaplan, and others. No previous background is required.
390. (EALC303) China & USSR Compared. (B) Waldron.
A comprehensive and multi-faceted survey of China and Russia, mostly in the twentieth century,
through examining preludes and postludes, but focusing above all on their time as Communist states
and sometimes quarreling Cold War allies. Of course we will cover the history, the geography, the
economics, the leaders (Stalin, Mao), and the great events - not least the Second World War in each always comparing, contrasting, and drawing linkages. We will also examine, however, daily life and
work for ordinary people, developments in society, and not least their common attemps at revolution,
at somehow creating new and unprecedented polities, having populations of radically transformed new
people. This informative, fascinating quest will take us from folklore to literature and the arts to dissent
and religion and ecology, among other topics. As far as possible we will let their people speak for
themselves, by assigning mostly translations of original sources including novels and memoirs, even
poetry. A comprehensive assessment of the strategically critical Asian heartland - which at over 14
million square miles is larger than Canada, the United States, and Western Europe combined.
Lectures, readings, midterm, short paper, and in-class final.
394. (EALC044) China and the World: Modern Times. Waldron.
History 394 is a comprehensive introduction to the last hundred years of China's relations with the
world, with emphasis on American-Chinese relations, but within the necessary context of China's
relations with other countries from Asia to Europe to Africa and elsewhere (as well as Washington's
changing relations with Beijing). China's role in the world can be understood only when the full
background and international context is made clear. This course has no prerequisites: freshmen and
others lacking background will find it manageable and interesting. Students who have successfully
completed this course will be well positioned to understand some of the most important of current
events, and if they like, pursue the topics as careers (there will be no shortage, I assure you).
Although much will be said about diplomacy, and Chinese diplomatic strategy in particular, the mileposts of the course will be a series of wars: World War I and its effects on China; the heroic Chinese
war of resistance against Japan (1937-1945) in which, effectively without allies, the Chinese avoided
defeat; the bitter Civil War that followed almost immediately (1946-1949) and brought Mao Zedong and
his Communists to power while the predecessor Nationalist government fled to the island of Taiwan;
then the Korean War (1950-1953) and the close Chinese-Soviet alliance that followed; The Taiwan
Straits Crises (1954-1955, 1958, 1996); the Chinese-Indian war (1962) the origin of a situation now
heating up; the Sino-Soviet border conflicts (1969); the Vietnam War (1955-1975) which changed the
United States profoundly while reorientating China internationally; the (at the time) little noticed
Chinese invasion of Vietnam (1979) - and finally the increasingly tense situation today, between Chine
and India, and China and her maritime neighbors from Japan to Indonesia, many U.S. allies.
SM 411. (COML411, ENGL234) Introduction to Written Culture, 14th - 18th Centuries. (C)
Chartier/Stallybrass.

Page 23 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
395. (EALC105, EALC505) East Asian Diplomacy. (A) Dickinson.
This course will survey the history of relations among the great powers in East Asia from 1600 to the
present. Special emphasis will be played upon the peculiarities of cross-national exchange in Asia (as
compared to Europe), particularly the difficulties of relations among states possessing fundamentally
different cultural traditions. We will explore the many informal, as well as formal, means of diplomacy in
Asia over the past 400 years.

Departmental Honors Program (398, 400-401)
SM 398. Junior Honors in History. (B) Staff.
Open to junior honors candidates in history. Introduction to the study and analysis of historical
phenomena. Emphasis on theoretical approaches to historical knowledge, problems of methodology,
and introduction to research design and strategy. Objective of this seminar is the development of
honors thesis proposal.
SM 400. Senior Honors in History I. (E) Staff.
Open to senior honors candidates in history who will begin writing their honors thesis during this
seminar.

Undergraduate Upper Level Courses (403-499). Open to Graduate Students
SM 412. (AFRC372, EALC442, INTR290, NELC334) Topics in World History. (C) Waldron.
SM 414. Human Rights and History. (C) Nathans.
The idea of universal, inalienable rights--once dismissed by the philosopher Jeremy Bentham as
"nonsense upon stilts"--has become the dominant moral language of our time, the self-evident truth
par excellence of our age. Human rights have become a source of inspiration to oppressed individuals
and groups across the world, the rallying cry for a global civil society, and not least, a controversial
source of legitimation for American foreign policy. This seminar asks: how did all this come to be? We
will investigate human rights not only as theories embodied in texts, but as practices embedded in
specific historical contexts. Are human rights the product of a peculiarly European heritage, of the
Enlightenment and protestantism? How did Americans reconcile inalienable rights with the reality of
slavery? Did human rights serve as a "civilizing" mask for colonialism? Can universal rights be
reconciled with genuine cultural diversity? Through case studies and close readings, the seminar will
work toward a genealogy of human rights.
415. (COML419) European Intellectual History of the Seventeenth Century. (A) Kors.
A survey based soley on primary sources of the main currents of seventeenth-century European
thought: the criticism of inherited systems and of the authority of the past; skepticism, rationalism;
empiricism; and the rise of the new natural philosophy. We will study deep conceptual change as an
historical phenomenon, examining works that were both profoundly influential in the seventeenthcentury and that are of enduring historical significance. There are no prerequisites, and one of the
goals of the course is to make seventeenth-century thought accessible in its context to the twenty-first
century student.

Page 24 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
416. (COML416) European Intellectual History in the 18th Century. (B) Kors.
A survey based soley on primary sources of the main currents of eighteenth-century European
thought: the "Enlightenment;" deism; natural religion; skepticism; evangelical revival; political reform;
utilitarianism; naturalism; and materialism. The course will focus on works widely-read in the
eighteenth century and of enduring historical significance. There are no prerequisites, and one of the
goals of the course is to make eighteenth-century thought accessible in its context to the twenty-first
century.
SM 418. (COML418) European Intellectual History since 1945. (B) Breckman.
This course concentrates on French intellectual history after 1945, with some excursions into
Germany. We will explore changing conceptions of the intellectual, from Satre's concept of the
'engagement' to Foucault's idea of the 'specific intellectual'; the rise and fall of existentialism;
structuralism and poststructuralism; and the debate over 'postmodernity.'
420. European International Relations from the Age of Enlightenment to the Great War. (A)
McDougall.
This course will examine the international politics of Europe in the 18th and 19th centuries, up to the
outbreak of World War I. During these centuries, the European great powers experienced significant
internal transformations and also a revolution in their relations, both of which reinforced and
accelerated each other. In the process, Europe asserted a dominant position in world politics, but also
sowed the seed for the terrible castrophes of the 20th Century. The course will address this
transformation of European diplomacy with special attention to the rivalries between the great powers,
the impact of nationalism and emerging mass politics, the interplay between military and economic
power, and the relationship between the European powers and the rest of the world.
431. A World at War: World War II in Europe and Asia. (B) Childers.
This course will examine the diplomatic origins, military course and domestic implications of World War
II.
421. Europe and the World since 1914. (D) Ogle.
This course looks at Europe's interactions with other world regions throughout the twentieth century.
Over the course of roughly a hundred years, Europeans have shaped the fates of peoples living
beyond the western world, for instance through the impact of two world wars, European colonialism,
and the global Cold War. At the same time, European societies 'at home' were not left unaffected by
these interactions. Even today, Europeans are facing the legacies of some of these histories in
immigration and the politics of religion and secularism for example. The past century also saw a
dramatic shift in Europe's position in the world - from dominance to a loss of influence in the shadow
of the United States and more recently, China.
The course spends significant time covering the histories of world regions other than Europe. It
furthermore considers some interactions and exchanges between world regions from a social and
cultural point of view. Because the class spans roughtly a century, the content has to remain
introductory and general, although a very basic familiarity with 20th-century international history is
helpful.

Page 25 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
425. World War I. (D) Holquist.
This survey course examines the outbreak, conduct, and aftermath of the First World War. The First
World War put an end to the world of the 19th century and laid the foundations of the 20th century, the
age of destruction and devastation. This course will examine the war in three components: the longterm and immediate causes of the First World War; the war's catastrophic conduct, on the battlefield
and on the home front; and the war's devastating aftermath. While we will discuss military operations
and certain battles, this course is not a military history of the war; it covers the social, economic,
political and diplomatic aspects that contributed to the war's outbreak and made possible its execution
over four devastating years. No preliminary knowledge or coursework is required.
430. Rise and Fall of the Third Reich. (A) Childers.
The meteoric rise of Hitler's NSDAP in Germany, the nature of Nazi rule, and the final collapse of the
Third Reich. The first half of the semester analyzes the appeal of the NSDAP- who joined the party,
who voted for it, and why. Nazi mobilization tactics, campaign strategy, and grass-roots techniques, the
content of the party's social appeals. The second half of the course concentrates on the Nazis in
power, their use of terror and propaganda, their ideological objective, everyday life in the Third Reich,
the possibilities of resistance to the regime. Special attention will be devoted to Nazi Jewish policy and
the step that led to the "Final Solution" and the Holocaust.
SM 440. (URBS420) Perspectives on Urban Poverty. (C) Fairbanks.
This course provides an interdisciplinary introduction to 20th century urban poverty, and 20th century
urban poverty knowledge. In addition to providing an historical overview of American poverty, the
course is primarily concerned with the ways in which historical, cultural, political, racial, social, spatial/
geographical, and economic forces have either shaped or been left out of contemporary debates on
urban poverty. Of great importance, the course will evaluate competing analytic trends in the social
sciences and their respective implications in terms of the question of what can be known about urban
poverty in the contexts of social policy and practice, academic research, and the broader social
imaginary. We will critically analyze a wide body of literature that theorizes and explains urban poverty.
Course readings span the disciplines of sociology, anthropology, urban studies, history, and social
welfare. Primacy will be granted to critical analysis and deconstruction of course texts, particularly with
regard to the ways in which poverty knowledge creates, sustains, and constricts meaningful channels
of action in urban poverty policy and practice interventions.
441. North American Colonial History. (A) Brown.
A survey of the development of American colonial society, 1607-1750, with emphasis on the regional
differences between life in early New England, the Mid-Atlantic, and the South, as well as the
relationships between British colonists, Native Americans, and African Americans.
442. America in the Era of the Revolution, 1763-1800. (B) St. George.
As a number of historians have observed, the American Revolution now may seem to have been the
inevitable culmination of political, economic, and cultural changes underway in the eighteenth century.
But for many whose lives were altered by its disruptive contours, it was more improbable than
inevitable. How, then, are we to make sense of the Revolution? What were its causes? Its progress?
Its extended "settlement," or period of resolution and questions during the course of the semester, we
will need to keep our eyes open to changes afoot in many social fields: the ascendancy or democratic
and egalitarian thought; the widespread development of consumerism and market capitalism; the
linked forms processes of rebellion and nation-building; and the economic and strategic progress of
the conflict itself.

Page 26 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
SM 449. (JWST449, RELS422) God and Nature: Readings on the Encounter between Jewish
Thought and Science. (C) Ruderman.
God and Nature examines the place of the natural world, medicine, and science in Jewish thought
from antiquity to the modern era. It looks especially at a body of primary sources in Hebrew written
during the age of the so-called "scientific revolution" and during its aftermath. The course is a seminar
open to undergraduate and graduate students with a reading knowledge of classical Hebrew. Students
without Hebrew with special interest in the subject might enroll with special permission from the
instructor.
SM 489. (AFRC488, AFST489, URBS489) Africans Abroad: Emigrants, Refugees, and Citizens in
the New African Diaspora. (C) Cassanelli.
This seminar will examine the experiences of recent emigrants and refugees from Africa, including
many now living in the city of Philadelphia and the surrounding region. In addition to reading some of
the historical and comparative literature on migration, ethnic diasporas, and transnationalism, students
will have the opportunity to conduct research on specific African communities in Philadelphia or
elsewhere in North America, Europe, or the Middle East. African emigres' relations with both their
home and host societies will be explored and compared with the experience of other immigrant groups
over the past century. Topics include reasons for leaving Africa, patterns of economic and educational
adaptation abroad, changes in gender and generational roles, issues of cultural and political identity,
and the impact of national immigration policies.
451. The U.S. and the World since 1898. (C) Offner.
This class examines the emergence of the U.S. as a world power since 1898, and considers both the
international and domestic consequences of U.S. foreign relations. In one respect, the twentieth
century was a strange time to become a global empire: it was the period when colonial systems
centered in Europe, Russia, Japan, and Turkey collapsed, and new nations emerged throughout Africa
and Asia. This class explores the changing strategies of military, economic, and political intervention
that the U.S. pursued as colonization lost legitimacy. Within that framework, the class invites students
to think about several questions: How did the idea and practice of empire change over the twentieth
century? How did the United States relate to new visions of independence emerging in Africa, Asia,
and Latin America? How did global interactions both inform and reflect racial ideology in the United
States? Finally, how did international affairs transform U.S. politics and social movements?
452. (INTR290) Topics in International Relations. (C) STAFF.
SM 455. (PPE 475, SOCI450) Topics in American History. (C) STAFF.
SM 490. (GRMN581, JWST490, RELS429) Topics in Jewish History. (C) Staff.
Reading and discussion course on selected topics in Jewish history.
SM 590. (COML502, ENGL501, GRMN510) TPCS IN LANG AND LIT. (A) Staff.

Graduate Courses (500-999)

Page 27 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
SM 501. The Nature of Sex. (C) Brown.
What is natural about sex, gender, sexuality and reproduction? This course examines a range of social
science, feminist, and historical theories that try to make sense of some of the most intimate and
seemingly timeless features of the human experience: the difference between the sexes, the
relationship between gender and anatomical sex, and the emotional and social dynamics of
reproduction. Among the topics we will consider are the relationship between public and private life;
the historic connections between patriarchy and capitalism; reproduction as a social and cultural as
well a biological phenomenon; class, race, ethnicity, and religion as alternative sites of identity;
citizenship, legal personhood and contract; the dynamics of empire and conquest; feminism; sexuality;
the history of the body; visual culture; postmodernist, poststructuralist, and postfeminist ways of
thinking about sex and gender; the current debates about the meaning of marriage; and the challenge
presented by transgender lives. The course is designed for graduate students but open to
undergraduates with the permission of the instructor.
SM 530. (AFRC530) 20th Century Afro-American Historiography. (A) Staff.
This course will study major historical works on African American history for the post-1890 period.
Emphasis on intellectual, political, and cultural history, and special attention to current debates about
the relevance of this history and race generally to studies and students of United States history.
SM 533. (JWST533, RELS533) Topics in Ancient and Medieval Christianity. (B) Staff.
Topics vary.
SM 550. Topics in Jewish History. (C) Staff.
Reading and discussion course on selected topics in Jewish history.
SM 608. (CPLN800, SOCI608, URBS608) Proseminar in Urban Studies. (E) Birch.
Open to PhD students, this scholar-oriented seminar explores how academic researchers from
different disciplines define researchable questions, craft research designs, and contribute to
knowledge through an examination of important and/or recently published books and monographs with
an urban focus. Required of all first- and second- year CPLN doctoral students and those doctoral
students enrolled in the Urban Studies Graduate Certificate Program, enrollment is limited to 15
students. Other doctoral students may enroll on a space available basis. Course requirements include
completion of a major research paper on a topic selected in consultation with the instructor.
SM 610. (AFRC610, GSWS610, HSSC610, URBS610) Topics in American History. (A) Staff.
Reading and discussion course on selected topics in American history.
SM 620. (COML621, GRMN630, JWST620, RUSS618, SLAV623) Topics in European History. (A)
Staff.
Reading and Discussion course on selected topics in European History.
SM 630. (EALC541, EALC726, EALC774, EALC780, SAST512) Topics in Asian History. (C) Staff.
Reading and discussion course on selected topics in Asian History.
SM 640. (NELC686) Topics in Middle Eastern History. (C) Staff.
Reading and discussion course on selected topics in Middle Eastern history.

Page 28 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}
SM 650. (AFRC650, AFST650) Topics in African History. (C) Staff.
Reading and discussion course on selected topics in African history
SM 660. (AFRC527) Topics in Latin American and Caribbean History. (C) Staff.
Reading and discussion course on selected topics in Latin American and Caribbean history
SM 670. (AFRC670, GSWS670, SAST632) Topics in Trans Regional History. (C) Staff.
Reading and discussion course on selected topics in Transregional History

Proseminars and Research Seminars
SM 668. (AFRC668) Colloquium in the History of Law and Social Policy. (A) Berry.
This is a course in the history of law and policy-making with respect to selected social problems.
Discussion of assigned readings and papers will elaborate the role law, lawyers, judges, other public
official and policy advocates have played in proposing solutions to specific problems. The course will
permit theevaluation of the importance of historical perspective and legal expertise in policy debates.
SM 700. Proseminar in History. (E) Staff.
Weekly readings, discussions, and writing assignments to develop a global perspective within which to
study human events in various regional/cultural milieus, c. 1400 to the present.
SM 710. (LAW 969) Research seminar in American history.. (C) Staff.
Research seminar on selected topics in American history.
SM 720. (COML721, RELS738) Research in European History. (C) Staff.
Research seminar on selected topics in European history.
SM 730. Research Seminar in Asian History. (C) Staff.
Research seminar on selected topics in Asian history.
SM 740. (AFRC740, AFST740, GSWS740) Research Seminar in Middle Eastern History. (C) Staff.
Research seminar on selected topics in Middle Eastern history.
SM 750. Research Seminar in African History. (C) Staff.
Research seminar on selected topics in African history.
SM 760. Research Seminar in latin American and Caribbean History. (C) Staff.
Research seminar on selected topics in Latin American and Caribbean history.
SM 770. (LALS771) Res Sem: Transregional. (C)
Research seminar on selected topics in Transregional history.

Page 29 of 30

HISTORY
(AS) {HIST}

Page 30 of 30

