INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(AS) {INTR}
101. Transnational Issues in Global Politics. (C) Staff.
Transnational Issues in Global Politics This course is designed to provide students with an introduction
to transnational issues and world politics and to acquaint them with some of the leading issues,
theories, concepts and processes that shape and define world events. It is expected that students
taking the course will gain an ability to analyze, understand objectively evaluate and apprecate the
complex dynamic that is "global politics." In order to better understand other nations, their leaders and
their motivations, the readings and lectures in the first segment of this course will examine the
traditional and contemporary approaches to studying world politics. Next, we will focus on the
instruments of conflict and cooperation and the forces of integration and fragmentation in the world
today. Finally, we will assess some of the major international issues of our time (i.e. climate change,
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, genocide and human trafficking) and debate the
prospects for bringing peace and prosperity to a world that is rife with conflict and poverty. The
overriding challenge in this introductory course is to consider international relations from different
perspectives and to be open and adaptive as you develop a deeper understanding of global issues
and politics.
199. Independent Study. (C)
200. International Relations Theory & Practice.
A survey of theoretical and conceptual approaches to the study of InternationalRelations as they are
employed by analysts and practitioners in the field.
250. Political Risk Analysis. (C) Frank Plantan.
This course teaches students to apply social science theories and concepts together with futures
methodologies (e.g. Delphi method; country risk assessments used by ratings agencies) to the
challenges of addressing international political risks to the continuity, effectiveness and operations of
business, government and other organizations in their international transactions.
290. (ASAM122, HIST365, HIST412, SAST282, SAST292) Topics in International Relations. (C)
Staff.
350. Research Methods/Practice in IR. (M)
International Relations is concerned with both theory and practice so we employ a range of analytical
tools to examine actors and events in world politics. The purpose of this course is to introduce
students to the various research methods utilized by students and scholars in the field of IR including:
case studies, historical - comparative and archival research, survey research, interviewing techniques,
simulations, quantitative and statistical analysis.
SM 390. Senior Seminar for Thesis Research. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Intr 350. Senior Seminar for
Thesis Research
Seminar in International Relations. A two semester sequence including review of advanced
International Relations theory and research methods for the preparation of the senior thesis.
SM 391. Senior Seminar For Thesis Research. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): INTR 390.
Seminar in international relations. Second semester of a two semester sequence including review of
advanced international relations theory and research methods for the preparation of the senior thesis.
399. Independent Study for Thesis Research. (C)

Page 1 of 2

INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(AS) {INTR}

Page 2 of 2

