INTEGRATED PRODUCT DESIGN
(EG) {IPD}
500. PRODUCT ENG BASICS.
501. Integrated Computer-Aided Design, Manufacturing and Analysis. (B) Prerequisite(s): MEAM
101, MEAM 150, and MEAM 210, or graduate standing in the School of Engineering, Design, or
Wharton with similar experience.
The majority of today's engineered products move through an advanced computer-aided workflow
which greatly speeds design and process time. This course will explore the fundamental components
of this workflow through a combination of lectures, hands-on exercises, and a semester design project.
General course topics include: fundamental design principles, project definition and needfinding,
advanced computer-aided design, rapid prototyping techniques, computer-controlled machining, and
an in-depth exploration of the modern analysis and simulation tools that have revolutionized the way in
which products are designed. Enrollment is limited.
503. (ARCH303) IPD FUNDAMENTALS.
504. (BE 514) Rehab Engineering and Design. (C) Prerequisite(s): Graduate students or permission
of the instructor.
Students will learn about problems faced by disabled persons and medical rehabilitation specialists,
and how engineering design can be used to solve and ameliorate those problems. The course
combines lectures, multiple design projects and exercises, and field trips to clinical rehabilitation
facilities. Students will have substantial interactio with clinical faculty, as well as with patients.
509. Needfinding. (B)
Needfinding is an approach that puts people and their needs at the center of product development and
business strategy creation. Over 90% of new products introduced into the marketplace fail. A good
portion of these failures are due to lack of understanding of end consumers and their needs. To
develop truly successful new products, it's not enough just to ask people what they need or want.
Designers and engineers need tools and techniques to get beyond what people can explicitly state
and determine their implicit needs. Needfinding is an approach for developing deep insights that
provide strategic direction for corporations and open up new possibilities for product development. In
this class students will gain a toolset from which to develop their own approaches to conducting
researching for design: learning how to think about other people, about culture, and about new
perspectives. They will also learn tactical skills: how to define research questions, how to conduct
observations and interviews, how to interpret results, how to synthesize them into fodder for design,
and how to communicate their findings in a way that is compelling and actionable for designers,
marketers, and business strategists.
This class is designed for graduate students and upper level undergrads with a specific interest in
product design or design thinking.
511. Creative Thinking and Design.. (A) It is recommended that undergraduates take MEAM 101
prior to this course.
This is a creative & iterative problem solving course that uses a series of mechanical design challenge
projects to move students into the broad realm of unpredictable often incalculable time-constrained
problem solving. It explores a wide variety of problem definition, exploration and solving "tools," and a
variety of surrounding "design thinking" topics, such as ethics and the design of experience. Drawing
and prototyping are used in the projects for ideation, iteration, speculation and communication.

Page 1 of 5

INTEGRATED PRODUCT DESIGN
(EG) {IPD}
514. (MEAM514) Design for Manufacturability. (B) Prerequisite(s): MEAM 101 or equivalent, MEAM
210 or equivalent, Senior or Graduate standing in the School of Design, Engineering, or Business with
completed product development and/or design engineering core coursework or related experience.
This course is aimed at providing current and future product design/development engineers,
manufacturing engineers, and product development managers with an applied understanding of
Design for Manufacturability (DFM) concepts and methods. The course content includes materials
from multiple disciplines including: engineering design, manufacturing, marketing, finance, project
management, and quality systems.
515. (MEAM415, OIDD415) Product Design.. (C)
This course provides tools and methods for creating new products. The course is intended for students
with a strong career interest in new product development, entrepreneurship, and/or technology
development. The course follows an overall product methodology, including the identification of
customer needs, generation of product concepts, prototyping, and design-for-manufacturing. Weekly
student assignments are focused on the design of a new product and culminate in the creation of a
prototype. The course is open to juniors and seniors in SEAS or Wharton.
516. (MEAM516) Advanced Mechatronic Reactive Systems. (B)
This course combines performance art and advanced mechatronics concepts that include the design
and implementation of large-scale actuation, advanced sensing, actuation and control. This course
pairs design school and engineering students to form interdisciplinary teams that together design and
build electro-mechanical reactive spaces and scenic/architectural elements in the context of the
performing arts. The two disciplinary groups will be treated separately and receive credit for different
courses (ARCH746 will be taught concurrently and in some cases co-located) as they will be learning
different things. Engineering students gain design sensibilities and advanced mechatronics in the form
of networked embedded processing and protocols for large scale actuation and sensing. Design
students learn elementary mechatronics and design reactive architectures and work with engineering
students to build them. The class will culminate in a some artistic performance (typically with
professional artists) such as a Shakespeare play, robotic ballet, a mechatronic opera.
517. (OIDD416) Des & Dev Web-Based Prod. (C)
519. (ESE 519) REAL TIME EMBEDDED SYS. (C)
SM 521. (ARCH721) DESIGNING SMART OBJECTS. (C)
SM 528. (ARCH728) Design of Contemporary Products. (B)
This course was designed to explore intersections of functionality and performance using an
experimental platform to uncover opportunities within the built environment to create domestic
products. Provides practical insights into the material manipulation and aesthetic experimentation that
are essential for the design and fabrication of products. Lectures and case studies help students to
learn from examples and develop their own designs. Through a series of exercises, students design
and fabricate a prototype using actual materials. The course addresses problems unique to product
design, such as scale, weight, cost and production.

Page 2 of 5

INTEGRATED PRODUCT DESIGN
(EG) {IPD}
525. Ergonomics/Human Factors Based Product Design. (C)
Human Factors and Ergonomics knowledge is a critical component of a product designer or design
engineer's toolbox. This course teaches the direct application of existing human factors/ergonomic
data to the creation of new product designs. Applying human factors knowledge to problem solving for
product design happens throughout the design process. It is a useful input as initial ideas begin to ut
and as a way to verify completed concepts through directly documented user testing and design
iteration. The course would be a mini-lecture/studio style course in which the students will work in
class on assigned projects, finding, analyzing, extrapolating and applying data to design solutions and
creating mockups, modeland prototypes for user testing of their designs.
SM 526. (ARCH726) Contemporary Furniture Design. (B)
527. (ARCH727) Industrial Design I.. (A)
This course provides an introduction to the ideas and techniques of Industrial Design, which operates
between Engineering and Marketing as the design component of Integrated Product Development.
The course is intended for students from engineering, design, or business with an interest in multidisciplinary, needs-based product design methods. It will follow a workshop model, combining weekly
lectures on design manufacturing, with a progressive set of design exercises.
530. (ARCH733) Building Product Workshop: Transwall. (C)
As Craig Vogel notes in The Design of Things to Come, "we are in a new economic age that is in need
of a new renaissance in product development, on that leverages multiple minds working in concert,"
With this mindset, this interdisciplinary workshop guides students through the product design process
from design brief to concept generation in one semester, working firsthand with Transwall, a leading
manufacturer of demountable wall systems, to focus on a specific product need. The design
opportunity looks for the next generation of pre-manufactured wall systems; getting away from field
constructed walls and looking at critical issues of mass-produced wall systems; flexibility, mobility,
structural stability, acoustics, transparency/opacity, and operability. During the workshop, students will
explore the context that creates the unique need for a new product and have an opportunity to
conceptualize their design ideas through sketches, scale model studies and partial prototypes.
532. (ARCH632) Surface Effects. (B)
Several sections are offered from which students make a selection. This year'sselections include:
Space and Structure; Surface/Effects.
SM 544. (ARCH744) Digital Fabrication. (B)
A seminar and design workshop that explores associative and parametric CAD-CAM strategies, to
enable an interactive continuity between conception and fabrication. Through parametric 3D
constructions, students will explore how to link dink different aspects of the architectural projects, such
as: (1) design intention; (2) control of variation and adaptation; (3) construction constraints; (4) digital
fabrication processes. The course emphasizes the cross-fertilization of formal, technical and
performative aspects of the design activity.
545. (EAS 545) Eng Entrepreneurship I. (C)

Page 3 of 5

INTEGRATED PRODUCT DESIGN
(EG) {IPD}
549. (EAS 449) Product Development in Entrepreneurial Ventures. (B) Prerequisite(s): Seniors and
Graduate students from the School of Design, Engineering or Business that have an interest in
product design and/or integrated product development in an entrepreneurial environment.
A product is any artifact, service or experience for which a buyer is willing to pay. Product Design and
Development is at the core of entrepreneurship. Though in the modern mythology it is a solitary effort
by a passionate individual, entrepreneurship is frequently more successful when pursued in an
interdisciplinary environment. Though it rarely requires the greatest time investment, concentration of
personnel, the majority of the funding or even the greatest depth of expertise to accomplish, excellent
product design can be the difference between a successful or failed venture. A poorly designed
"product" can prevent a venture from being successful. An excellently designed product can make a
competent business plan much more successful. A well defined and designed product solution will
create differentiation, and cannot only meet customer expectation, but can create desirability. Through
the review and discussion of case studies, lecture subjects, guest lecturers, field trips, and a semester
long interdisciplinary team project, this class will provide insight into the problem identification and
product design processes, user needs research, intellectual property research, experience design,
Industrial Design, Interface Design, brand development and product centric fundraising processes.
Specific knowledge areas to be explored: Product design processes, User needs research,
Intellectual property research, Experience design, Industrial design, Interface design, Product Driven
Financial development
551. Design Processes. (C)
This studio is structured for IPD students as an intensive, interdisciplinary exploration of Design as
purposeful for Integrated Product Design. The goal of the studio is to give students a firsthand
experience of various processes involved in creating successful integrated product designs.This first
semester of the four-semester studio sequence focuses on giving students experience developing
designs based on a range of starting points: form, function, materiality and manufacturing process.
Students will practice design through rigorous, consistent processes for thinking through the evolution
of their ideas. In this course, they will go through an entire design process from conceptualization to
design to producing prototypes. They will be taught to focus on the specifics of their designs, causing
them to be conscious of what drives their choices as designers and providing them with a wider range
of tools to design from in successive projects. Course work will involve readings, assignments, class
participation, in-class exercises, a mid-term presentation and a final submission.
552. Problem Framing. (B)
In the second semester of the four-semester studio sequence, we ask students to take a step back
from what and how they are designing and ask the question of why they are designing it. We will teach
them a rigorous process for understanding stakeholder needs and for translating those needs into
implications for product design. They will begin to develop greater awareness of the personal, social,
competitive and technological contexts that their products fit into, and to learn how to design for those
contexts. They will develop the ability to dive into a topic and frame a design problem, and to
understand the implications of how they frame the problem on what they design. Ideally, they will use
this process to identify a problem or opportunity to work on for their final project. Course work will
involve readings, assignments, class participation, in-class exercises, and a final submission.
SM 561. IPD Theories/Methods I.
SM 562. (ARCH562) IPD Theories/Methods II. (B)
568. (FNAR268, FNAR568) INTEGRATIVE DESIGN STUD. (C)
599. Master's Independent Study. (C)
SM 699. IPD Seminar.. (C)

Page 4 of 5

INTEGRATED PRODUCT DESIGN
(EG) {IPD}
799. Studio Project Thesis.. (C)

Page 5 of 5

