KOREAN
(AS) {KORN}

KOREAN LANGUAGE COURSES (KORN)
011. Elementary Korean I. (A) Staff.
This course is designed for students who have little or no knowledge of Korean. This course aims to
develop foundational reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills through meaningful
communicative activities and tasks. Upon successful completion of this course, students should be
able to comprehend and carry on simple daily conversations and create simple sentences in the
past, present, and future tenses. Students will learn how to introduce themselves, describe their
surroundings, talk about daily lives, friends and relatives, and talk about past and future events.
012. Elementary Korean II. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of KORN 011 or equivalent
knowledge and permission of the instructor.
This is a continuation of KORN 011. This course aims to further develop the four language skills of
students to the novice-high level by building on materials covered in KORN 011. Students will learn
how to use three speech styles (polite formal, informal, and intimate) appropriately in a given context.
Upon successful completion of this course, students should be able to handle simple and elementary
needs of daily lives and talk (and write) about a variety of topics such as family, college life, birthday
celebration, shopping, Korean food, etc.
111. Intermediate Korean I. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of KORN 012 or equivalent
knowledge and permission of the instructor.
This is a continuation of KORN 012. This course is designed to develop students' Korean language
proficiency to the intermediate-low level of the ACTFL Proficiency Guidelines. Authentic materials, as
well as various student-centered activities that are highly contextualized in everyday interactions will
be used. Upon completion of the course, students will be able to present and exchange information
on a variety of topics such as weather, fashion, travel, mailing, housing, public transportation, and
shopping.
112. Intermediate Korean II. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of KORN 111 or equivalent
knowledge and permission of the instructor.
This is a continuation of KORN 111. This course is designed to develop students' Korean language
proficiency to the intermediate-mid level of the ACTFL Proficiency Guidelines. This course expands
student's competence by dealing with more functions in various contexts that students can frequently
encounter in everyday interactions. In order to prepare students for social contexts, students are
encouraged to engage in conversations by personalizing the topics, functions or contexts. Students
will perform in an interpersonal way by providing and obtaining information, expressing feelings and
emotions, and exchanging opinions on a variety of topics such as birthday parties, recreation and
hobbies, Korean holidays, marriage, cultural differences, education and jobs. This course completes
the College language requirement.

Page 1 of 3

KOREAN
(AS) {KORN}
131. Korean for Heritage Speakers I. (A) Jung.Prerequisite(s): Restricted to students who have
previous knowledge in Korean. Students are required to take the Korean placement test.
This course is designed for heritage speakers who have a strong background in everyday Korean.
This course focuses on enhancing linguistic accuracy (spelling, grammar, vocabulary, pronunciation)
and fluency (idiomatic and figurative expressions, narrative structure, discursive practice) in both
spoken and written Korean, as well as gaining a deeper understanding of Korean culture. Upon
completion of the course, students will be able to express themselves more accurately and
participate in Korea-related communities more meaningfully. This course and its subsequent course
KORN 132 complete the College language requirement.
132. Korean for Heritage Speakers II. (B) Jung.Prerequisite(s): Completion of KORN 131 or
equivalent knowledge and permission of the instructor.
This course is a continuation of KORN 131 and aims to further develop students' linguistic and
cultural competence by building on materials covered in KORN 131. In addition to gaining a deeper
understanding of Korean culture, the course focuses on enhancing linguistic accuracy and fluency in
both spoken and written Korean. Particular emphasis will be placed on building a meaningful Koreanspeaking community, as well as consolidation of grammar structures, and expansion and
enhancement of vocabulary. Topics include preparing for a trip to Korea, finding housing, college
culture in Korea, entertainment and participating in various social events. Upon completion of this
course, students will be able to express themselves more accurately and participate in Korea-related
communities more meaningfully. This course completes the College language requirement.
211. Advanced Korean I. (A) Cho.Prerequisite(s): Completion of KORN 112, 132 or equivalent
knowledge and permission of the instructor.
This course aims to develop functional proficiency in Korean at the intermediate-high level. Students
will develop competence in fluency, grammatical accuracy and socio-linguistic/cultural
appropriateness through a variety of activities and assignments. In addition, students will learn to
communicate using more sophisticated grammatical structures and advanced vocabulary on various
topics. The development of each of the four language skills (speaking, listening, reading and writing)
is equally emphasized.
212. Advanced Korean II. (B) Cho.Prerequisite(s): Completion of KORN 211 or equivalent
knowledge and permission of the instructor.
This is a continuation of KORN 211. Students continue to develop functional proficiency in Korean at
the advanced-low level. The topics include literature, culture, Korean customs, and social issues in
contemporary Korea.
281. BUSINESS COMM IN KOREAN. (A) Cho.Prerequisite(s): completion of KORN 211 or
equivelent knowledge and permission of the instructor.
Offered through the Penn Language Center. This course is designed to help students improve their
Korean language proficiency by learning essential communication skills necessary to engage in
business in Korea. Students will also develop their knowledge of and competence in Korean business
culture and practice. The course objectives include: (1) to learn essential business terms, advanced
grammar structures and communication strategies in business transactions; (2) to learn Korean
business customs and culture, work norms, and business etiquette that students need to successfully
communicate in a Korean business context. Topics include job application, business correspondence
and reports, discussion and presentation in business meetings, communication styles and strategies
in business contexts, current business culture, etc.

Page 2 of 3

KOREAN
(AS) {KORN}
432. Advanced Readings in Modern Korean II. (B) Jung.Prerequisite(s): Completion of KORN 431
or equivalent knowledge and permission of the instructor.
This course allows development of creative and analytical thinking through introduction of more
organized thematic topics such as family, human relationships, and the reflection of self-images, and
individual's mental status while the society changes in time.
381. Business Korean I. (M) Cho.Prerequisite(s): Completion of KORN 212 or equivalent knowledge
and permission of the instructor.
Offered through the Penn Language Center. Business Korean I is designed for students who want to
sharpen their Korean language skills to the advanced-high level by focusing their study on Korean
business and economy. Students will learn business/economy-related terminologies and concepts.
They will also take an in-depth look at the issues related to business practices and environment in
Korea. Students will improve and refine their language skills through actively participating in
discussions, research, and presentations.
382. Business Korean II. (M) Cho.Prerequisite(s): Completion of KORN 381 or equivalent
knowledge and permission of the instructor.
Offered through the Penn Language Center. A continuation of the material offered in KORN 381.
Business Korean I. Students further develop their Korean language proficiency at the advance-high
level by studying case studies, participating in discussions, and doing research and giving
presentations on the topic of current Korean business and economy.
431. Advanced Readings Modern Korean I. (M) Jung.Prerequisite(s): Completion of KORN 312,
382 or equivalent knowledge and permission of the instructor.
This course is designed for advanced level students. Based on literary pieces in the form of short
stories, essays, and novels, students are to gain an in-depth, multi-faceted and critical understanding
of Korean people, society, and culture. These objectives are achieved primarily through 1) close
reading and discussion of original literary texts by 20th -century Korean writers; and 2) regular writing
exercises. Some Korean films that are related to the topics of the reading text will be used.
481. Advanced Business Korean I. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of 312, 382 or equivalent
knowledge and permission of the instructor.
Offered through the Penn Language Center. This course aims to further develop students' advanced
language proficiency and simultaneously deepen their knowledge and understanding of specific
areas related to Korean business and economy such as an expansion of business into Asian markets
and globalization strategies. Through research, discussion and presentation on various case studies
and other business-related materials, students will enhance their critical thinking skills and gain an indepth perspective on issues related to contemporary Korean business operations and practices.
482. Advanced Business Korean II. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of KORN 481 or
equivalent knowledge and permission of the instructor.
Offered through the Penn Language Center. A continuation of the material offered in KORN 481:
Advanced Business Korean I. Students continue to closely follow the current topics of business and
financial markets of Korea by actively participating in discussions, research, and presentations.

Page 3 of 3

