LATIN AMERICAN AND LATINO STUDIES
(AS) {LALS}
SM 016. (ENGL015) Topics in Literature. (C) Freshman Seminar
Freshman Seminars under the title "Topics in Literature" will afford entering students who are
considering literary study as their major the opportunity to explore a particular and limited subject with
a professor whose current work lies in that area. Topics may range from the lyric poems of
Shakespeare's period to the ethnic fiction of contemporary America. Small class-size will insure all
students the opportunity to participate in lively discussions. Students may expect frequent and
extensive writing assignments, but these seminars are not writing courses; rather, they are intensive
introductions to the serious study of literature. One of them may be counted toward the English major
and may be applied to a period, genre, or thematic requirement within the major.
057. (ENGL057) Literature of Americas Before 1900. (M) Staff.
This course examines U.S. literature and culture in the context of the global history of the Americas.
Historical moments informing the course will range from the origins of the Caribbean slave-and-sugar
trade at the beginning of the nineteenth century, to the Monroe Doctrine of 1823 and the U.S. Mexico
and Spanish-American wars. Readings will include works by authors such as Frances Caldern de la
Barca, Frederick Douglass, Helen Hunt Jackson, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, Jose Marti, Herman
Melville, John Rollin Ridge, Mara Amparo Ruiz de Burton, and Felix Varela.
070. (HIST070) Colonial Latin America. (A) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Walker, T.. Fulfills
History & Tradition Distribution Requirement
This course provides an introduction to the broad literature on Latin America's rich colonial history. We
will begin by tracing some of the early originas of - and points of contact between - the Indian, Iberian,
and Africa men and women who formed the basis of colonial society. As the course progresses, we
will explore the variety of ways in which colonial subjects lived, worked, ate, worshipped, and
socialized. Lectures and reading assignments will draw upon a variety of sources, including court
cases, artistic renderings, city maps and street plans, travel accounts of visits to the regions, and the
material, cultural, and intellectual products made possible by the wealth and dynamism of the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The course will conclude with an analysis of the Age of
Revolutions, a period of dramatic upheaval that remains at the center of lively scholarly debates. By
the end of the semester, students will be able to engage the key questions driving these debates, the
most important of which, perhaps, is: what is Latin America's colonial legacy?
071. (HIST071) Latin America 1791-Present. (B) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. FarnsworthAlvear.
Surveys Latin American and Caribbean history from the Haitian Revolution of 1791 to the present. We
will examine the legacy of Spanish colonialism and slavery, movements for national and cultural
independence, twentieth-century radicalism, and the politics of race in contemporary Latin America.
Readings include fictional as well as analytical representations, and a film series will accompany the
course.
072. (HIST072) Introduction to Latin American and Latino Studies. (B) Dr. Ann Farnsworth-Alvear.
Designed to introduce students to the interdisciplinary field of Latin American and Latino Studies, this
is a seminar oriented toward first and second year students. Readings will range widely, from scholarly
work on the colonial world that followed from and pushed back against the "conquest"; to literary and
artistic explorations of Latin American identities; to social scientists' explorations of how Latinos are
changing the United States in the current generation.
SM 100. (ARTH100) Intro to Art. (C) Staff. For freshmen only
Topics Varies.

Page 1 of 12

LATIN AMERICAN AND LATINO STUDIES
(AS) {LALS}
SM 107. (AFRC107, HIST106) Freshman Seminar: The World After 1800. (C) Staff.
Topics Vary
110. (PSCI110) Comparative Politics. (C) Staff.
This course is designed to introduce students to comparative political analysis. How can the political
behavior, circumstances, institutions, and dynamic patterns of change that people experience in very
different societies be analyzed using the same set of concepts and theories? Key themes include
nationalism, political culture, democratization, authoritarianism, and the nature of protracted conflict.
116. (ANTH116) Caribbean Culture and Politics. (M) Thomas, D..
This course offers anthropological perspectives on the Caribbean as a geo-political and socio-cultural
region, and on contemporary Caribbean diaspora cultures. We will examine how the region's long and
diverse colonial history has structured relationships between race, ethnicity, class, gender and power,
as well as how people have challenged these structures. As a region in which there have been
massive transplantations of peoples and their cultures from Africa, Asia, and Europe, and upon which
the United States has exerted considerable influence, we will quesiton the processes by which the
meeting and mixing of peoples and cultures has occurred. Course readings include material on the
political economy of slavery and the plantation system, family and community life, religious beliefs and
practices, gender roles and ideologies, popular culture, and the differing ways national, ethnic, and
racial identities are expressed on the islands and throughout the Caribbean diaspora.
SM 133. (ANTH133) Native People and Their Environment. (M) Erickson. Freshman Seminar
The relationship between the activities of native peoples and the environment is a complex and
contentious issue. One perspective argues that native peoples had little impact on the environments
because of their low population densities, limited technology, and conservation ethic and worldview. At
other extreme, biodiversity, and Nature itself, is considered the product of a long history of human
activities. This seminar will examine the Myth of the Ecologically Noble Savage, the Myth of the
Pristine Environment, the alliance between native peoples and Green Politics, and the contribution of
native peoples to appropriate technology, sustainable development and conservation of biodiversity.
136. (HIST136) Chicano History in the United States. (M) Staff.
On one level Chicano History is the history of Mexican-origin peoples in the United States since 1848.
But Chicano also refers to the emergence of a specific historical identity grounded in the protest
movements of the late 1960s and early 1970s. Both definitions are part of the project of this course.
We will survey the histories of the many Mexican American people who might (or might not) consider
themselves Chicano from the Mexican American War to the Zoot Suit Riots, from El Plan Espiritual de
Aztln to Selena. The class will also explore issues of ethnicity, immigration past and present, class and
gender differences, cultural conflict and exchange, transnational economies and identities, popular
cultural images and production, family life and community building, struggles for equality, the
relationship of Mexican Americans to Latino/as, and the controversies raised by the emergence of an
increasingly multi-ethnic, multilingual society.
174. Reform and Revolution in the Americas. (C) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Offner.
The United States and Latin America produced a remarkable series of revolutions and reforms during
the twentieth century. This course examines efforts throughout the hemisphere to define and address
problems around land, labor, and property; nation, empire, and autonomy; and racism, democracy, and
citizenship. It considers the relationship between national upheavals, the global consequences of
events in the hemisphere, and the relation between social and political history, on the one hand, and
the development of economic ideas, on the other.

Page 2 of 12

LATIN AMERICAN AND LATINO STUDIES
(AS) {LALS}
175. (HIST175) Society and Culture in Brazil. (C) Walker, T..
With its booming economy, the recent inauguration of its first female president, and its selection as
host to the 2012 World Cup and Olympic games, Brazil is growing in global prestige. But amid all
these exciting developments are devastating socioeconomic inequalities. Access to safe living
conditions, livable wages, higher education, and overall social mobility remain painfully out of reach to
many Brazilians, the majority of whom are the descendants of slaves. Why do these problems persist
in a country that has had such an enduring and widespread reputation as a "racial democracy"? What
are the possibilities of closing the equality gap in Brazil?
SM 202. (HIST202) Major Seminar in History: Europe After 1800. (C) Staff.
SM 204. (AFRC205, HIST204) Major Seminar - Americas, Post 1800. (C) Staff.
HIST 204 is a topics course. LALS 204 will be cross-listed only when the subject matter is relevant to
Latin American and Latino Studies.
213. (PSCI213) Latin American Politics. (C) Falleti.
This course examines the dynamics of political and economic change in twentieth century Latin
America, with the goal of achieving an understanding of contemporary politics in the region. We will
analyze topics such as the incorporation of the region to the international economy and the
consolidatio of oligarchic states (1880s to 1930s), corporatism, populism, and elict pacts (1930s and
1940s), social revolution, democratic breakdown, and military rule (1960s and 1970s), transitions to
democracy and human rights advocacy (1980s) makret-oriented reforms (1990s), and the turn to the
left of current governments (2000s). The course will draw primarily from the experiences of Argentina,
Brazil, Colombia, Chile and Mexico. No prior knowledge of the region is required.
SM 220. (CINE224, PRTG222) Literature, Film and Music of Brazil. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): PRTG
221.
Topics vary. For current course description, please see department's webpage: http://
ccat.sas.upenn.edu/roml/portuguese/undergraduate/courses.html
235. (SOCI266) Special Topics in Sociology/Latinos in the United States. (C) Emilio Parrado.
This course presents a broad overview of the Latino population in the United States that focuses on
the economic and sociological aspects of Latino immigration and assimilation. Topics to be covered
include: construction of Latino identity, the history of U.S. Latino immigration, Latino family patterns
and household structure, Latino educational attainment. Latino incorporation into the U.S. labor force,
earnings and economic well-being among Latino-origin groups, assimilation and the second
generation. The course will stress the importance of understanding Latinos within the overall system of
race and ethnic relations in the U.S., as well as in comparison with previous immigration flows,
particularly from Europe. We will pay particular attention to the economic impact of Latio immigration
on both the U.S. receiving and Latin American sending communities, and the efficacy and future
possililities of U.S. immigration policy. Within all of these diverse topics, we will stress the
heterogeneity of the Latino population according to national origin groups (i.e. Mexican, Puerto Rican,
Cuban, and other Latinos), as well as generational differences between immigrants and the native
born.

Page 3 of 12

LATIN AMERICAN AND LATINO STUDIES
(AS) {LALS}
SM 221. (COML223, SPAN221) Early Hispanic Literature and Culture. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s):
SPAN 219.
This course engages in an in-depth study of Spanish and Colonial Spanish American culture(s) from
the Pre-Roman period through the 17th century. Among the topics included are: Islamic Spain, the
Spanish Reconquista, the Inquisition, the Origins of the Spanish Language, Sephardic Culture in
Spain, the Pilgrimage Route to St. James, Picaresque Literature, Golden Age Spanish Drama, preColumbian Civilizations, the Conquest of the New World, and the establishment of colonial rule in
Spanish America.
SM 231. (PRTG221) Perspectives in Brazilizan Culture. (M) Flannery Marcia.Prerequisite(s): Taught
in Portuguese.
Topics vary. For current course description, please see department's webpage: http://
ccat.sas.upenn.edu/roml/portuguese/undergraduate/courses.html
251. (PSCI251) Inter-American Relations. (C) Staff.
This course examines patterns of inter-American conflict and cooperation. The course examines
United States-Latin American relations, regional organizations and subregional organizations. Specific
topics include development, dependency, and security.
SM 252. (SPAN250) Spanish American Literature in Translation.. (C) Arts & Letters Sector. All
Classes. Staff. All readings will be offered in English
This is a topics course. The topic may be "Latin American Travel Narratives or "Caribbean Writers in
the U.S."
SM 254. (ANTH254) Archaeology of the Inca. (M) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Erickson.
The Inca created a vast and powerful South American empire in the high Andes Mountains that was
finally conquered by Spain. Using Penn's impressive Museum collections and other archaeological,
linguistic, and historical sources, this course will examine Inca religion and worldview, architecture,
sacred temples, the capital of Cuzco, ritual calendar, ceque system, textiles, metalworking, economic
policies and expansionist politics from the dual perspectives of Inca rulers and their subjects. Our task
is to explain the rise, dominance, and fall of the Incas as a major South American civilization.
258. (AFRC258, ANTH256, FOLK259, MUSC257) Caribbean Music & Diaspora. (M) Rommen.
This survey course considers Caribbean musics within a broad and historical framework. Caribbean
musical practices are explored by illustrating the many ways that aesthetics, ritual, communication,
religion, and social structure are embodied in and contested through performance. These initial
inquiries open onto an investigation of a range of theoretical concepts that become particularly
pertinent in Caribbean contexts <-concepts such as post-colonialism, migration, ethnicity, hybridity,
syncretism, and globalization. Each of these concepts, moreover, will be explored with a view toward
understanding its connections to the central analytical paradigm of the course <- diaspora. Throughout
the course, we will listen to many different styles and repertories of music, ranging from calypso to
junkanoo, from rumba to merengue, and from dancehall to zouk. We will then work to understand them
not only in relation to the readings that frame our discussions but also in relations to our own NorthAmerican contexts of music consuption and production.

Page 4 of 12

LATIN AMERICAN AND LATINO STUDIES
(AS) {LALS}
SM 260. (AFRC262, AFST260, ENGL260, GSWS260, LING470) Advance Topics in Narrative. (M)
Staff.
This course explores an aspect of the novel intensively, asking how novels work and what they do to
us and for us. Specific course topics will vary from year to year.
268. (ANTH258, CIS 106) Visualizing the Past/Peopling the Present. (M) Badler/Erickson.
Most people's information about the Past is drawn from coffee table picture books, popular movies,
video games, documetaries about discoveries of "ancient, mysterious, and lost" civilations, and tours
often led by guides of limited or even dubious credentials. How are these ideas presented, formed,
and circulated? Who creates and selects the information presented in this diverse media? Are these
presentations accurate? Do they promote or hurt scientific explanations? Can the artisitic, aesthetic,
and scientific realms be bridged to effectively promote the past? This class will focus on case studies
and critiques of how archaeology and the past are created, presented and used in movies, museums,
games, the internet, and art.
SM 270. (SPAN250) Major Works in Spanish & Latin American Literature. (M) Staff.
Topics vary. See the Romance Languages Department's website at http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/roml for
a description of current offerings.
275. Race and Ethnicity in U. S. Latino/a Literature. (C) Carmen Lamas.
In this course we will study the construction of race and ethnicity in key novels written in English by
Latina/o writers. We will examine how U.S.- American race relations shape Latino/a notions and
contructions of race in these texts and how the authors' connections with Latin America and the
Caribbean do the same. In order to understandxc these constructions from a hemispheric perspective,
we will juxtapose our reading of Latina/o texts with works by Latin American writers that address
similar issues but in a Latin American context. All coursework and discussions are in English.
SM 271. (URBS270) Ethnicity:The Immigrant City. (M) Hanson, R..
Immigration is a controversial issue, dividing Americans from Congress to big cities to small towns.
What's at stake in these debates? What does immigration mean for cities and regions? And what roles
should policy makers planners, and community organizations play in shaping migration and its
impacts? This course examines these questions in the context of immigrant, refugee, and receiving
communities in the United States. It surveys public policy and community and economic development
practices related to migration, at the local, regional, and trans-national scale. Class readings,
discussions, and regular visits to a variety of Philadelphia's immigrant neighborhoods explore themes
including labor markets, political mobilization, social and cultural policy, and the built environment.
274. (ARTH274) Facing America. (M) Shaw.
This course explores the visual history of race in the United States as both self-fashioning and cultural
mythology by examining the ways that conceptions of Native American, Latino, and Asian identity,
alongside ideas of Blackness and Whiteness, have combined to create the various cultural ideologies
of class, gender, and sexuality that remain evident in historical visual and material culture. We also
investigate the ways that these creations have subsequently helped to launch new visual
entertainments, including museum spectacles, blackface minstrelsy, and early film, from the colonial
period through the 1940s.

Page 5 of 12

LATIN AMERICAN AND LATINO STUDIES
(AS) {LALS}
SM 286. (AFRC289, ENGL286, HIST286, URBS286) Topics in American Literature. (M)
The literature studied in this course is usually organized thematically. Examples: American Authors
and The Imagined Past, considering the role of history in literature and studying works by Benjamin
Franklin, Nathaniel Hawthorne, William Faulkner, Mark Twain, James Fenimore Cooper, and others;
"American Writers and "The School of Hawthorne" studying the influence of Hawthorne on Henry
James, Flannery O'Connor, Robert Penn Warren, and others: "Ezra Pound" or "Edgar Allan Poe and
the Poe Tradition."
SM 291. (COML284, ENGL270, ROML290) Latin American Literature. (M) Staff. Spaces will be
reserved for English Majors
This course explores an aspect of Latina/o literature intensively; specific course topics will vary from
year to year.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a description of the current
offerings.
SM 293. (COML293, ENGL293) Topics in Literature & Society. (M) Staff. ENGL 293 is a Topics
course. When the topic is Carribean literature, the following description applies.
This course explores an aspect of Postcolonial literature intensively; specific course topics vary from
year to year.
SM 296. (CINE294, COML294, ROML296) Latin American Film. (M) Staff.
See the Romance Language site.
299. (ARTH299) Latin American Art: Pre Colombian to Colonial. (M) Staff.
This course examines the visual culture of Latin America before and after the culture of Latin America
before and after the conquest up to the eighteenth centy. It first explores Mesoamerican and South
American art and architecture, focusing on the Olmec, Mayan, Aztec, Incan and Tupinamba. The the
class studies the way in which the colonial culture of the Americas developed in the early modern
period throught an analysis of works in various media including codices, painting, featherwork,
sculpture, architecture and print. Historical political and religious contexts will be explored in
relationship to art production. Some themes for the course include hybridity, cross-cultural interaction,
conversion and propaganda.
SM 301. Undergraduate Seminar. Meister, Holod, Brownlee, Poggi, Haselberger, Kuttner, Davis,
Maxwell, Pittman, Silver, Beckman, Leja, Shaw, Dombrowski, Ousterhout, Silverman.
Topics vary.
303. (HIST303) Social Movements in Latin America. (C) Farnsworth/Alvear.
This course has two goals: first, to provide an in-depth look at a select number of twentieth century
social movements in Latin America. Second, to allow students to "learn by doing;" each participant will
produce a major research paper based on primary sources. Readings will include testimonial accounts
and fictional works, as well as critical studies.
SM 331. (PSCI331) Latino Politics. Staff.

Page 6 of 12

LATIN AMERICAN AND LATINO STUDIES
(AS) {LALS}
SM 355. (SPAN355) Topics in Spanish Drama. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Span 219.
Topics vary. See the Romance Languages Department's website at http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/roml for
a description of the current offerings.
SM 370. (ENGL370) Topics In Latina/o Literature. (M) Staff. Benjamin Franklin Seminar
This course explores an aspect of Latina/o literature intensively; specific course topics will vary from
year to year.
SM 391. (SPAN391) Spanish American Poetry. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Span 219.
Topics vary. See the Romance Languages Department's website at http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/roml for
a description of the current offerings.
SM 387. (AFRC387) Topics in Africana Studies. (C) Osuji, Sanders-Johnson, Willis.Prerequisite(s):
Junior and Senior Seminar.
Topics vary. A recent topic is "The Black Body and the Lens." The Spring 2013 topic, "Race in Brazil.:
The goal of this course is to have an understanding of race and race-mixing in Brazil with explicit
comparisons with the U.S., Mexico, and other countries in the Western Hemisphere. We will compare
and contrast forms of racial categorization and ideologies towards race mixture, whether in the form of
family formation, nation-building projects, and social policy. Specifically, we will examine how it has
been promoted or prevented by society as well as the state. We will draw primarily on social science
perspectives, however we will cover some work by historians and legal scholars. By the end of this
course, students should have an understanding of the role of race-mixing in both constructing and
deconstructing racial categories and its impact on racial and ethnic inequality. This course will count as
a requirement for the Africana major and minor.
SM 388. (SPAN388) TPCS: SPAN/LTAM CINEMA.
SM 390. (FREN390) Survey of Francophone Literature. (M)
A brief introduction about the stages of French colonialism and its continuing political and cultural
consequences, and then reading in various major works -- novels, plays, poems -- in French by
authors from Quebec, the Caribbean, Africa (including the Maghreb), etc. Of interest to majors in
International Relations, Anthropology and African Studies as well as majors in French.
SM 392. (SPAN392) Colonial Spanish American Literature. (M) Prerequisite(s): Span 219.
Topics vary. See the Romance Languages Department's website at http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/roml for
a description of the current offerings.
SM 393. (COML396, ROML396) Latin American Literature. (M) Staff.
SM 394. (SPAN394) Spanish American Fiction. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Span 219.
Topics vary. See the Romance Languages Department's website at http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/roml for
a description of the current offerings.
SM 395. (SPAN395) Hispanic Theater. (M) Regueiro.Prerequisite(s): Span 219.
Topics vary. See the Romance Languages Department's website at http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/roml for
a description of the current offerings.

Page 7 of 12

LATIN AMERICAN AND LATINO STUDIES
(AS) {LALS}
SM 396. (COML390, SPAN390) Introduction to Spanish American Literature. (M) Staff.Prerequisite
(s): Span 219.
Topics vary. See the Romance Languages Department's website at http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/roml for
a description of the current offerings.
SM 397. (CINE396, GSWS396, SPAN396) Studies in Spanish-American Literature. (M)
Staff.Prerequisite(s): Span 219.
Topics vary. See the Romance Languages Department's website at http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/roml for
a description of the current offerings.
SM 398. (CINE397, SPAN397) History of Spanish American Culture. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Span
219.
Topics vary. See the Romance Languages Department's website at http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/roml for
a description of the current offerings.
SM 414. (URBS414) Memory and Urbanism in the Americas. (M) Farber.
Whether as statues, walls, plaques, parks, or other commemorative structures, monuments are
regular features of urban topography. Such "sites of memory" not only instruct us about significant
events of the past, but do so in the space and time of the present. And yet, the historical memory of
cities is also made legible through modes of cultural expression and inscription - including literature,
visual art, graffiti, music, and street performance. Cycles of urban de-industrialization and renewal
since the 1970s, as well as legacies of conflict and inequality, have exacerbated the need for alternate
forms of commemoration. The Occupy movement is one continued example of how urban space can
be reanimated through demarcation, embodiment, and calls for collectivity.
SM 419. (PSCI419) Democracy and Decentralization. (M) Falleti, T..
Are decentralization reforms fostering local community participation and improving the quality of
democracy in Latin America? Are they, insted, posing a threat to democracy and development? In the
last thirty years, Latin Ameican countries have undergone major reforms that devolved fiscal
resources, administrative responsibilities, and political authority from the central governments to the
states and municipalities. These decentralization reforms have radically altered the political landscape
in Latin America, even inthe countries that have since then tried to recentralize power, such as
Venezuela. What were the main causes of the decentralization movement? Who were the main
national and international actors who pushed forward these reforms? What have the main political,
fiscal, and policy consequences of decentralization been? These are some of the questions this
course will focus on. The experiences of decentralization in Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Bolivia,
Venezuela, and Mexico will be studied. Although prior knowledge of Latin American politics is not
required, additional readings will be assigned to the students who have not taken at least one
introductory course in Latin American politics, history or cultures.
SM 425. (SOCI425) LATIN@ CULTURAL HISTORY. Irizarry, Johnny.
This course takes a multi-disciplinary approach to the study of the resiliency and impact of Latin@
cultural and artistic contributions, esthetics, expressions and institution building int he United Stats
from the Civil Rights Era to the present. We will explore how Latin@s arguculturally defining being
"American"; how their artistic expressions fit and influence the creativity and productivity of American
and global Arts & Cultural expressions; and the Latin@ interactions of race, culture, society, economy
and politics in the U.S.
SM 554. (PSCI554) DEMOC IN LATIN AMERICA. (M)

Page 8 of 12

LATIN AMERICAN AND LATINO STUDIES
(AS) {LALS}
433. (ANTH433) Andean Archaeology. (M) Erickson.
Consideration of culture history of native peoples of Andean area, with emphasis on pre-conquest
archaeology of Central Andean region.
468. (ANTH468) The Ancient Maya. (M) Sharer.
Examination of current understanding of Ancient Maya, emphasizing critical review of recent
archaelogical research and theories.
SM 527. (AFRC527) Spring 2015: Race, Gender & Auto/Biography. (C) Sanders.
Story telling, oral history, and memoir are some of the oldest forms of documenting lives. Pivoting
around the themes of voices, authenticity and memory, this course dconsiders the methods, theories
and archival practices of autobiography, biography and oral history.It builds on the last two decades of
scholarship that pair oral history with traditional written archival material- giving particular attention to
the methodologies and practices used by African descended women and queer storytellers and
listeners. During our discussons, we will consider the ethics between researher and storyteller while
addresing the following questions: How do emotions, performances, and identities (gender, sexuality,
race, age (dis)ability, etc.) inform the stories we tell and collect? How does history impact the
contemporary construction and narration of history? How does the practice and procedure of black
women's and queer autobiography, biography and oral history inform interdisciplinary research
methods and blur narrative genres?
SM 557. (AAMW557, ANTH557) Archaeology: Theory & Methodology. (M) Erickson, C..
Advanced seminar for potential professional archaeologists. Course will examine critically main past
and present theoretical issues in archaeological research and interpretation, and consider various
methodologies utilized towa these interpretative ends.
SM 586. (ENGL586) Topics in 20th Century American Fiction. (M) Staff.
This course covers topics in 20th-Century American fiction with specific emphasis determined by the
instructor.
SM 587. (HIST587) Iberian Colonialism. (H) Staff.
The creation of colonial societies in America under Spanish and Portuguese rule. Emphasis on
primary sources (English translation) dealing with the social, cultural and biological effects of
European contact. Topics include: the role of missionaries and evangelization, Iberian and Indian
perceptions of the "other", the impact of Old-World diseases, animals and plants on American people
and ecosystems.
SM 589. (ANTH589, HIST589) Conquest and Conversion. (C) Staff.
Early culture contact in Mesoamerica (Mexico and Central America) and the Andes. Compares
European and Amerindian conceptions of time and space of evil and disorder, the individual's relation
to society, the physical world, and the sacred. Emphasis is on the zones and the means of intercultural
communication -- especially as influenced by the introduction of European writing -- and on the
intermediaries who straddled the linguistic and cultural boundaries.
SM 590. (COML590, ENGL590, GSWS589) Introduction to Francophone Literature. (M)
An introduction to major literary movements and authors from five areas of Francophonie: the
Maghreb, West Africa, Central Africa, the Caribbean and Quebec.

Page 9 of 12

LATIN AMERICAN AND LATINO STUDIES
(AS) {LALS}
SM 592. (ENGL592) 20th Century Literature & Theory. (M)
This course treats some aspect of literary and cultural politics in the 20th-Century with emphasis
varying by instructor.
SM 655. (PSCI655) Democratization. (M) Falleti.
This graduate class focuses on issues of democratization (and de-democratization), as studied in the
comparative politics literature. The course is structured in four parts. In the first part, we scrutinize
conceptualizations and measurements of democracy. In the second part, we study competing political
theories about the origins of democracy. The third part of the seminar is devoted to the study of
democratic transition and consolidation processes. To finish, we tackle specific issues in
democratization such as social capital and civic participation, as well as the resilience of (subnational)
authoritarianism.
SM 673. (EDUC673) Selected Topics in Education Linguistics. (C)
The focus for each semester will vary to reflect those issues most relevant to current concerns in
educational linguistics.
SM 677. (SOCI677) International Migration. (M) Flippen, C.
A comprehensive review of theories and research on international migration. The course introduces
the basic precepts of neoclassical economics, the new economics of labor migration, segmented labor
market theory, world systems theory, social capital theory, and the theory of cumulative causation.
Readings examine patterns and processes of global migration during the classic age from 1800-1914
as well as during the postwar period from 1945 to the present. The course concludes with an
evaluation of immigration policies in the United States.
SM 690. (COML691, SPAN690) Studies in Spanish American Literature. (M) Staff.
Topics vary. Previous topics have included Latin American Narrative and Art in Times of Globalization,
Modernismo / fin de siglo, Art, Literature, and Society in Latin America at the End of the 20th Century.
SM 692. (SPAN692) Colonial Literature of Spanish America. (M) Staff.
Study of the historical context of the colonial period in Spanish America and of major works in prose
and poetry.
SM 694. (CINE694, SPAN694) Spanish & Latin Am Cine. (M) Staff.
Topics vary. See the Romance Languages Department's website at http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/roml/ for
a description of the current offerings.

Page 10 of 12

LATIN AMERICAN AND LATINO STUDIES
(AS) {LALS}
SM 770. (AFRC771, FOLK770, MUSC770) Seminar in Afro-American Music. (M) Ramsey.
This course will consider the American musical landscape from the colonial period to the present with
an emphasis, though not exclusive focus, on non-written traditions. The course is not a chronological
journey, but rather a topical treatment of the various issues in the history of American music. Some of
the specific, project-oriented activities of the course will consist of, but will not be limited to the
following: (1)participating in the development of a traveling exhibition on the Apollo Theater for the
SmithsonianInstitution; (2)development of a permanent website for a history of jazz course at Penn; (3)
reviewing two manuscripts for publication to a major press; (4)developing a working proposal for a
history of African American music. In this context students will learn the basics of contemporary music
criticism, including: identifying a work's significant musical gestures; positioning those gestures within
a broader field of musical rhetoric, conventions, and social contracts; and theorizing the conventions
with respect to large systems of cultural knowledge, such as historical, geographical contexts as well
as the lived experiences of audiences, composers, performers, and dancers. Other topics covered:
origin and development of American popular music and gendered and racial aspects of American
classical music.
SM 697. (SPAN697) Studies in Latin American Culture. (M) Staff.
Topics vary. See the Romance Languages Department's website at http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/roml/ for
a description of the current offerings.
SM 710. (AFRC710) POL/SOC HIST AFR DIASP.
SM 720. (COML720, MUSC720) Studies in Renaissance Music. (M) Staff.
Seminar on selected topics in the music of the Renaissance.
SM 771. (HIST770) ORAL HISTORY. (C)

The growing importance of technology in business and industry and the corresponding increase
in the scope of regulation in this area are creating greater synergies between law and technology.
Gone are the days when each discipline could exist in its own sphere. Practicing technologists
are learning that they need a better understanding of the legal considerations affecting their
work. This course will introduce the key legal principles that technology professionals need to
know, presenting them from the bottom-up the way a practicing technologist would experience
them. Major topics will include the impact of potential liability on product design, differences
when life-critical systems are involved, proper and improper uses of intellectual property,
privacy regulation, permissible constraints imposed by nondisclosure agreements and
employment relationships, and the entrepreneurship-related aspects of technology law.
798. Advanced Topics. (C)
Titles and Topics vary. See department website for descriptions: http://www.sp2.upenn.edu/programs/
msw/courses.html
568. FEDERAL CRIMINAL LAW.
576. PENN STAFF IND STUDY.
577. INTERNET LAW.
588. HEALTH LAW FRAUD & ABUSE.

Page 11 of 12

LATIN AMERICAN AND LATINO STUDIES
(AS) {LALS}
598. STRUCTURING VENTURE CAP.
732. International Civil Society Law.

Page 12 of 12

