LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE & REGIONAL PLANNING
(FA) {LARP}

Core Courses
501. Studio I. (A) Faculty.
The focus of this foundation studio is to explore ways of recording and representing landscape - with
an emphasis on material, space, rhythm and measure - through a range of drawings and
constructions. The studio attempts to create a sensibility toward landscape where the act of surveying
a site is as much an imaginative endeavor as is the crafting of an artifact or the construction of a path
in a landscape. Emphasis is placed on visual and manual skills in two-dimensional and threedimensional constructions (drawing, fabrications, model-making, etc.), while developing ways to "see"
landscape. The studio is structured around the themes of wetness/dryness and enclosure/disclosure,
and works with one or more sites in the Philadelphia region. Recent sites have included Bartram's
Gardens and East Fairmount Park in Philadelphia. In the past, the studio has focused on a territory
around Martha's Furnace in the Pine Barrens, NJ; a part of the Meadowlands in northern NJ; an
anthracite strip-mine in part of Pennsylvania's Appalachian Mountains; the Wissahickon Creek and,
the Schuylkill River Trail in Philadelphia; and Great Falls in Paterson, NJ. Projects involve the making
of pathways in these otherwise undesigned environments.
502. Studio II. (B) M'Closkey/Faculty.Prerequisite(s): LARP 501: Studio I.
This foundation design studio explores the relationship among sites, drawings, models and the making
of landscape architectural projects. The studio site is typically located on vacant or abandoned land in
North Philadelphia along the Delaware River. Such sites are fairly large in size and present a complex
set of issues, including fragmentation, lack of access, and contamination. Through the design of a
park, students test and refine the relationship among project concept, modes of visualization, and
project formation (organizational and material).
As a precursor to site work, students experiment with methods and materials for making
organization and form in two and three dimensions. In the early part of the semester, we explore
techniques of imaging that generate multiples (scenarios), serial progressions (transformations of a
sort), and iterations (transformations of another). Through various grafting techniques, we use the
resultant drawings and models as analogous structures in order to imagine possible future
organizations and uses for the site. These studies occur in conjunction with site interpretations ranging
from photographs and sketches, to measured drawings and diagrams. The objective for the studio is to
develop an informed and imaginative response to the site in order to create new relationships among
the site, its immediate edges and the larger neighborhood or region.
511. Workshop I: Ecology and Built Landscapes. (A) Willig and Popowsky.
This workshop explores a sequence of sites extending from the Atlantic Ocean to the Appalachian
Mountains that illustrates the changing geology and topography of the regional physiographic
provinces including the Atlantic Coastal Plain, Piedmont, and Valley and Ridge. In moving westward
along the transect, field trips to natural areas and constructed sites will highlight the diversity of
regional plant communities ranging from primary dune to salt marsh, serpentine Virginia pine-oak
forest to seepage wetland, and more. Analysis of the inter-connections between the underlying
geology, topography, hydrology, soils, vegetation, wildlife, and human interventions will reveal patterns
reflecting process and demonstrate key ecological and cultural systems and processes through the
production of field notebooks as well as large-scale measured drawings. Ultimately students will
develop a vocabulary (recognition, identification and nomenclature) of the materials of landscape, its
substance, its ecology, and its changing nature owing to place and time.
NOTE: COURSE MEETS IN ASSIGNED CLASSROOM FROM 9-1PM. CLASS MEETING FROM
2-5PM IS DEDICATED TO FIELD WORK.

Page 1 of 12

LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE & REGIONAL PLANNING
(FA) {LARP}
512. Workshop II: Landform and Planting Design. (B) Olgyay.Prerequisite(s): LARP 511: Workshop
I. Corequisite(s): Summer Field Ecology Laboratory/Willig.
Workshop II combines two of the most elemental tools in the practice of landscape architecture:
landform and planting design. Grading - the shaping and sculpting of the landform - is both art and
science, and thus Workshop II aims to provide an appreciation of landform as an evocative component
in the design vocabulary as well as a critical tool in solving difficult design problems. The basic
techniques and strategies of grading design (slopes, terraces, water management, grade change
devices) will be introduced, practiced and reinforced, so that grading design becomes an integral part
of the students' design approach. Lecture, field trips, modeling, in-class exercises, and group projects
will be used.
The Planting component provides students with a working overview of the principles and processes
of planting design. Plants will be considered both as individual elements and as part of larger dynamic
systems. The natural distribution of plants, concepts of plant community and successional patterns,
and the relationship of planting an topography will be used as the initial framework for planting design.
Planting design typologies will be examined as an outgrowth of these "natural" patterns. The role of
plants as a key element in the structural design of the landscape will be explored through a
combination of modeling, plan and section drawing, temporal studies, writing, field trips and case
studies. Emphasis will be placed on process and evolution: the temporality of planting (daily, seasonal
and annual changes), establishment and maintenance of plantings, and the process of planting
design. During the first week of May, a five-day field ecology course focuses on techniques of urban
revitalization, sustainable land use, reclamation, and restoration. The field trips offer insight into the
diversity of approaches to using plants to promote positive environmental change.
542. Media II: Digital Visualization. (B) VanDerSys.Prerequisite(s): LARP 533: Media I.
Continuing the sequence of the Landscape Architecture media classes, this course will provide
students with the techniques to explore and examine precision surface profiles and land forming
strategies, in both physical and digital models. These models provide a basis to speculate on what
processes and programs might be engendered or instigated.
Rhino will be the primary modeling platform. Associated plug-ins of Grasshopper, Rhino Terrain,
Sonic, and Bongo will help extend the toolset. GIS will facilitate the collection and analysis of extent
data. The Adobe Creative Cloud will also be used for documenting and expressing modeling
processes through static and time-based visualizations.
533. Media I: Drawing and Visualization. (A) Faculty.
Drawing is the ability to experience deeply things we see and envision. It allows us, not only to
represent things or images seen, but, to discover and construct space and depth on the two
dimensions of drawing surface. Expanding the tools of drawing, this course presents inquiries into
applied media providing a basis for envisioning the speculative and developing an economy of
expression. Work will be closely related to work in Studio I. Students will be introduced to the formal
syntax of drawing (line, contour, structure, texture, chiaroscuro), graphic grammar (orthographic,
oblique, perspective projection drawings and free-hand sketching) alongside exercises in material
expression (collage, assemblage).

Page 2 of 12

LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE & REGIONAL PLANNING
(FA) {LARP}
535. (LARP780) Theory I: The Culture of Nature. (A) Weller.
Landscape architecture, architecture and visual art are all mediations between nature and culture.
This course is designed to help students form their own view regarding our relationship with the
"natural" world around us in an age of ecological crisis. To achieve this, the course provides a
stimulating historical and contemporary survey of ideas of nature. We explore ways "nature" has been
understood mythically, theologically, ideologically, philosophically, scientifically, and artistically through
the ages, with an emphasis on contemporary culture. We survey the way in which the polarity of
culture and nature has been historically constructed and more recently, deconstructed. The
pedagogical philosophy of this course is that an appreciation of the broad pattern of history and the
ideas that have shaped it are foundational to living a critical and ethical life and central to the process
of making contemporary art, architecture, and landscape architecture.
540. Theory II: History of Ideas and Forms in Landscape Architecture. (B) Fabiani Giannetto.
This course unfolds several contemporary issues that shape the profession, such as giving form to
environmental values, balancing science and art, ecology and design, reconsidering the need for the
beautiful vis-a-vis the many sites challenged by pollution and abuse. Among the topics of discussion,
this course will also take into account how recent phenomena such as the late twentieth-century
increase in world population, sprawl, and environmental pollution, and how these have changed the
reality described by the very word "nature" and have contributed to expand the domain of landscape
architecture. The discussion of topics will integrate contemporary ideas and their roots in earlier
theoretical formulation. The past will be presented as a way to illuminate, receive, and critique the
present. Course objectives are to become familiar with the social and cultural processes that inform
the landscape architectural discourse and to be able to discuss in an informed manner the impact of
the latter upon design trends; to be able to trace the roots of contemporary ideas in earlier theoretical
formulations; and to be able to think critically and to enhance synthesis and augmentation skills.
543. Media III: Flows: Linear / Non-Linear. (A) VanDerSys/Faculty.Prerequisite(s): Students in the 3yr MLA program must complete LARP 533: Media I and LARP 542 Media II prior to beginning LARP
543: Media III.
This course is the third in the media sequence and is required of all MLA students at the 600 level.
This course engages the generative potential of the dynamic and temporal attributes of the landscape
medium. Time-based visualizations are used to investigate landscape organizations shaped through
the dynamic interplay of varying processes and their spatial consequences. Emphasis will parallel the
LARP 601 on urban ecology and landscape systems.
544. Media IV: Futures: Trends and Trajectories. (B) Freese.Prerequisite(s): Students in the 3-yr
MLA program must complete LARP 533: Media I, LARP 542 Media II and LARP 543: Media III prior to
beginning LARP 544: Media IV.
This course is the fourth in the media sequence and is required of all MLA students at the 600 level.
This course exposes students to parametric tools as mechanisms for analyzing and generating both
predictable and emergent terrain dependent urban morphologies. Rather than inert lines of shapes,
space infrastructure are visualized as products of force and flow. Emphasis will parallel the LARP 602
studio on forms of urbanization. This course is open to Landscape Architecture students only. Students
outside of Landscape Architecture will need instructor permission to enroll in this course.

Page 3 of 12

LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE & REGIONAL PLANNING
(FA) {LARP}
612. Workshop IV: Advanced Landscape Construction. (A) Burrell.Prerequisite(s): LARP 611:
Workshop III.
Advanced Landscape Construction: The Art and Craft of Design Documentation and Detailing
introduces students to the process of landscape documentation as means of strengthening design
intent through careful material selection and articulation of form. The course builds upon Workshop III
by expanding the concept of site systems to the full range of drawings, details, specifications, and
contracts used by landscape designers in the creation of the man-made environment. The course
features lectures, case studies and field walks, exploring documentation from initial concept through
construction administration. Topics will include materials and their use in exterior environments,
documentation phases and their role in a projects evolution and the art of detailing to ensure beautiful,
durable landscapes that define cohesive design.
601. Studio III. (A) Faculty.Prerequisite(s): Students in the 3-yr MLA program must complete LARP
501: Studio I and LARP 502: Studio II prior to beginning LARP 601: Studio III.
This studio brings together both two-year and three-year MLA students for a landscape studio problem
that works at a regional scale, as well as multiple design scales. LARP 601 - the Green Stimuli studio emphasizes rigorous site analysis, the strategic organization of living material, and the potential of
design to produce a wide range of effects. Studio problems are "live" - local leaders and experts are
actively trying to solve them, there is an audience for student work outside the University, and projects
have the potential to stimulate debate and new directions.
The Green Stimuli studio takes on design problems where soil, terrain, geology, mineral resources,
climate, water, plants, wildlife, and living systems interactions are major drivers. Studio projects
explore one or more of these dimensions in depth to reach high levels of design exploration, strategic
thinking, technical resolution and physical expression. The studio's topics intersect with a broader
universe of practical concerns, including land use, local and regional economies, real estate
development and public policy, as well as philosophical and artistic questions about nature and
ecology. The intent is that designed Green Stimuli make new connections between the material of
landscape and the economic, infrastructural, scientific, social, cultural and creative attributes of a
region.
602. Studio IV. (B) Marcinkoski/Faculty.Prerequisite(s): Students in the 3-yr MLA program must
complete LARP 501: Studio I, LARP 502: Studio II and LARP 601: Studio III prior to beginning LARP
602: Studio IV.
This studio is the fourth and final studio in the core sequence and is designed to introduce students to
essential competencies related to contemporary problems in urban design. The studio operates in
what have been referred to as "global cities" - contexts in which there are significant pressures on the
physical form of a metropolis from substantial population and economic growth (both ongoing and
projected). These pressures induce considerable demands for the development of new contexts. The
studio is focused on managing and megotiating these pressures through landscape-driven strategies
capable of guiding and organizing this urbanization. Students develop individual design strategies
through a process of mapping, modeling, scenario building and fieldwork that lead to both conceptual
and physical proposals for the development of new urban districts and metropolitan agendas.

Page 4 of 12

LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE & REGIONAL PLANNING
(FA) {LARP}
611. Workshop III: Site Engineering and Water Management. (A) Faculty.Prerequisite(s): Students
in the 3-yr MLA program must complete LARP 511: Workshop I and LARP 512: Workshop II prior to
beginning LARP 611: Workshop III.
Building upon the skills and concepts developed in Workshops I and II, this intermediate workshop
focuses on technical aspects of site design, with an emphasis on landscape performance. Functional
considerations related to landscapes and their associated systems - including circulation, drainage
and stormwater management, site stabilization and remediation - will be explored as vital and integral
components of landscape design, from concept to execution. Lectures, case studies, field trips, and
focused design exercises will enable students to develop facility in the tools, processes and metrics by
which landscape systems are designed, evaluated, built and maintained. In concert with the
concurrent design studio, students will consider the means by which functional parameters can give
rise to the conceptual, formal, and material characteristics of designed landscapes.
701. Studio V. (A) Faculty.
These advanced elective studios provide opportunities for focused exploration of particular themes in
contemporary landscape architecture. Important emerging and accomplished designers, often from
divergent points-of-view, interests and backgrounds, are invited to run these studios. Collaborative
options (between Landscape and the Departments of Architecture or City Planning) are sometimes
offered across the School. In addition to our own faculty who offer some of these studios (Fabiani
Giannetto, Gouverneur, Marcinkoski, Mathur, M'Closkey, Neises, Olin, Pevzner, Sanders, Tomlin),
visitors have included Paolo Burgi (Switzerland), Peter Latz (Munich), Bernard Lassus (Paris), Margie
Ruddick (Philadelphia), Chris Reed (Boston), Peter Beard (London), Nicholas Quennell (New York),
Ken Smith (New York), Raymond Gastil (New York), Alessandro Tagliolini (Italy), Ignacio Bunster
(Philadelphia), Perry Kulper (Los Angeles),James Wines (New York), Lee Weintraub (New York),
Charles Waldheim (Chicago), Stanislaus Fung (Australia), Dennis Wedlick (New York), Sandro
Marpillero (New York), Peter Connolly (Australia), and former associate professor Anita Berrizbeitia.
More recent visitors have been Claire Fellman (New York), Catherine Mosbach (Paris), Nanako
Umemoto/Neil Cook (New York), Valerio Morabito (Italy), Carol and Colin Franklin (Philadelphia), Keith
Kaseman (Philadelphia), Silvia Benedito (New York), Claudia Taborda (Lisbon), Mark Thomann (New
York), Jerry Van Eyck (New York), and Martin Rein-Cano (Berlin).
660. (CPLN660) Fundamentals of Urban Design. (A) Al.
This course is a requirement for students enrolled in Certificate in Urban Design and for Master of City
Planning students enrolled in the Urban Design concentration. How should urban designers give
shape to the city? What urban design methods could they apply? This course helps students acquire
the principles that can inform urban design practice. It has three major pedagogical objectives. First, it
helps students understand the contemporary city through a series urban design tools. Second, it
covers both historical and modern urban design principles. Finally, it includes all the scales in which
urban designers operate, ranging from the fundamentals of social interaction in public space, to the
sustainability of the region." This course is open to other interested PennDesign students if there is
space and with permission of the instructor.

Page 5 of 12

LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE & REGIONAL PLANNING
(FA) {LARP}
702. Studio VI. (B) Faculty.
These advanced elective studios provide opportunities for focused exploration of particular themes in
contemporary landscape architecture. Important emerging and accomplished designers, often from
divergent points-of-view, interests and backgrounds, are invited to run these studios. Collaborative
options (between Landscape and the Departments of Architecture or City Planning) are sometimes
offered across the School. In addition to our own faculty who offer some of these studios (Fabiani
Giannetto, Gouverneur, Marcinkoski, Mathur, M'Closkey, Neises, Olin, Pevzner, Sanders, Tomlin),
visitors have included Paolo Burgi (Switzerland), Peter Latz (Munich), Bernard Lassus (Paris), Margie
Ruddick (Philadelphia), Chris Reed (Boston), Peter Beard (London), Nicholas Quennell (New York),
Ken Smith (New York), Raymond Gastil (New York), Alessandro Tagliolini (Italy), Ignacio Bunster
(Philadelphia), Perry Kulper (Los Angeles),James Wines (New York), Lee Weintraub (New York),
Charles Waldheim (Chicago), Stanislaus Fung (Australia), Dennis Wedlick (New York), Sandro
Marpillero (New York), Peter Connolly (Australia), and former associate professor Anita Berrizbeitia.
More recent visitors have been Claire Fellman (New York), Catherine Mosbach (Paris), Nanako
Umemoto/Neil Cook (New York), Valerio Morabito (Italy), Carol and Colin Franklin (Philadelphia), Keith
Kaseman (Philadelphia), Silvia Benedito (New York), Claudia Taborda (Lisbon), Mark Thomann (New
York), Jerry Van Eyck (New York), and Martin Rein-Cano (Berlin).
761. Urban Ecology. (A) Carlisle/Pevzner.
This course introduces students to the core concepts, processes, and vocabulary of contemporary
urban ecology. It aims to provide a conceptual framework and grounding in an understanding of
ecological processes, in order to empower students to develop and critique the function and
performance of landscape interventions. Urban ecology describes the interaction of the built and
natural environment, looking at both ecology in the city, as well as ecology of the city. Lectures, case
studies, critical reading and design exercises will enable students to increase their ability to analyze
and interpret ecological systems and processes. By analyzing the application of ecological concepts in
the design management of urban landscapes, urban ecology will be explored as a dynamic, humaninfluenced system. Registration is limited to MLA students in the LARP 601 studio.
781. (CPLN673) Case Studies in Contemporary Urbanism, Landscape Arch, and Design. (B)
Gouverneur.
This course will expose students to a wide array of case studies in planning, urban design, and
landscape architecture including notions of sustainable development, the interplay between open
space and built form, the rehabilitation of existing areas as historic districts, commercial corridors, and
the improvement of squatter settlements. Also, it will focus on city expansions and new towns,
housing, mix-use developments, and areas of new centrality. The program will also address territorial
planning, the improvement of open space systems, and site specific interventions of parks, plazas,
streetscape and gardens. Cases will provide the proper ground for analysis and interpretation of
issues related to the design and implementation of "good" landscape and urban form. Class
discussions will be complemented with short design exercises. We will also enjoy the presence of
outstanding visiting lecturers who will share with us cutting-edge information, derived from their
professional practice and research. Registration is limited to MLA students in the LARP 602 studio and
to students in the Urban Design Certificate program . This course is cross-listed with CPLN 673.

Elective Courses

Page 6 of 12

LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE & REGIONAL PLANNING
(FA) {LARP}
704. Urban Design Research Studio. (B) Gouverneur/Al.
This course is a requirement for students enrolled in the Certificate of Urban Design. The Urban
Design Research Studio (UDRC) is a capstone educational experience open to students of
architecture, planning, landscape architecture and historic preservation in PennDesign. The studio's
focus is how design intelligence can be applied to complex urban problems which are at once
systemic and spatial. Reaching across scales and across disciplines the studio immerses students in
the social, economic, political, ecological and aesthetic complexity of the contemporary city in a way
that interweaves the speculative quality of the design process with the analytical and evidence-based
empiricism of urban reseach. Interdisciplinary collaboration is the studio's modus operandi and its
purpose is to develop techniques and strategies by which contemporary cities can become not only
metabolically more efficient but also more edifying of the human spirit in the 21st century. Acceptance
into the studio is based on interview and portfolio with priority placements given to students enrolled in
the Urban Design Certificate Program.
740. Topics in Digital Media. (C) Faculty.Prerequisite(s): LARP-543, MEDIA III.
These courses offer advanced instruction in the uses and applications of various digital media,
including Geographical Information Systems, 3-D modeling, video, animation, and web-design. These
courses are open to all interested School of Design students who already have a working knowledge
of basic digital graphic techniques and with permission of the instructor. Recent topics have been:
Simulated Natures (fall 2015, 2014), instructors Keith VanDerSys, Joshua Freese; Digital Fabrication
(spring 2009-2013), instructor Keith VanDerSys; Non-Static Representation: Video, Animation, and
Interactive Media (fall 2013, 2012), instructor: Todd Montgomery; Interoperable Terrains (fall
2008-2013), instructor: Keith Kaseman; Kino-Eye: Intro to Spatial Filmmaking (fall 2011, 2010),
instructor: Richie Gelles; Geometry Clouds, Fluid Landscapes (fall 2002-2006), instructor: David Ruy;
Tactical Surfaces / Topographic Modeling (fall 2002), instructor: Charles McGloughlin.
710. Implementation of Urban Design. (B)
This course is a requirement for students enrolled in the Certificate of Urban Design. With a focus on
contemporary major cities this subject charts the various ways in which urban design is typically
conceived, procured, administered and ultimately delivered. From the very conception of a project to
its completion, the various methods and avenues through which contemporary cities are planned,
designed, and constructed are examined from multiple perspectives so that students become familiar
with the myriad issues and main actors involved in urban development. Though exemplary case
studies the subject offers a comprehensive understanding of the complexities and contingencies of
contemporary city making, placing a particular emphasis on the role of the urban designer as a
practical, ethical and visionary agent of change. This course may open to other interested PennDesign
students if there is space and with permission of the instructor.
720. Topics in Representation. (C) Faculty.Prerequisite(s): LARP501, LARP533, LARP601,
ARCH501, ARCH532 OR ARCH601.
In these advanced representation courses the work extends to new ways of documenting and seeing
landscape. These courses are open to all interested School of Design students who have previous
drawing experience or have taken foundation studios. Recent topics have been: Traces and
Inscriptions (spring 2013), instructors: Anuradha Mathur, Matthew Neff; Landscape Representation
(fall annually),instructors: Valerio Morabito; Landscape Drawing (spring annually), instructor: Laurie
Olin; Landscape Drawing (spring 2008), instructors: David Gouverneur, Trevor Lee; Shifting
Landscapes: A Workshop in Representation (spring 2005, 2004), instructor: Anuradha Mathur; and
The Agile Pencil and Its Constructs (spring 2004) instructor: Mei Wu.

Page 7 of 12

LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE & REGIONAL PLANNING
(FA) {LARP}
730. Topics in Professional Practice. (C) Sanders. Fall 2015: course offering is limited to LARP
majors or by permission of the instructor.
These seminar courses explore ideas and methods in current landscape architectural practice. They
include instruction in professional procedures, office management, project development, contracts,
and collaborative ventures. They include visits to construction sites, professional offices and archives.
Recent topics have been: Transformational Leadership (fall 2015), instructor: Lucinda Sanders, Office
Practice (spring 2003-2015) instructor: Lucinda Sanders.
741. (CPLN632) Modeling Geographic Space. (B) Tomlin.
This course explores the nature and use of raster-oriented (i.e. image-based) Geographic Information
Systems (GIS) for the analysis and synthesis of spatial patterns and processes. Previous experience
in GIS is not required.
SM 743. (CPLN670) Geospatial Software Design. (A) Tomlin.
The purpose of this course is to equip students with a selected set of advanced tools and techniques
for the development and customization of geospatial data-processing capabilities. It is open to any
student with experience equivalent to that of an entry-level class on GIS.
SM 745. (CPLN680) Advanced Topics in GIS. (B) Tomlin.
This course offers students an opportunity to work closely with faculty, staff, local practitioners, and
each other in conducting independent projects that involve the development and/or application of
Geographic Information System (GIS) technology. The course is open to all students who can
demonstrate sufficient experience, expertise, or initiative to purse a successful term project.
750. Topics in Construction, Horticulture and Planting Design. (C) Faculty.
These courses explore relevant topics in construction, horticulture and planting design as they relate
to contemporary landscape architecture. The aim is to supplement fundamental skills and ideas
explored in the core curriculum workshops with more advanced, cutting-edge research, technology
and case studies. The teaching faculty are leading practitioners and researchers in the field. These
courses are open to all interested School of Design students.
Recent topics have been: Urban Horticulture and Planting Design (fall annually since 2009),
instructor: David Ostrich; Detailing New Urban Landscapes (spring 2012, 2011), instructor: Tom Ryan;
Building New Urban Landscapes, Construction, and Planting Design (fall 2009, 2008), instructor: Tom
Ryan; Urban Horticulture: Designing and Managing Landscape Plantings in Stressful Environments
(1998-2003), instructor: Paul Meyer; Advanced Planting Design, instructors: Rodney Robinson
(2003-2009), Dennis McGlade (fall 2006), Sheila Brady; and Sustainable Large Scale Planting of
Trees, Shrubs, Perennials and Grasses (fall 2001), instructor: Wolfgang Oehme.
755. Arboretum Management I: Understanding Plants. (A) Skema.
In this course, students will learn about plants from an oraganismal perspective, an applied/practical
perspective, an aesthetic perspective, an environmental perspective, and an evolutionary perspective.
Utilizing the plant collection of the Morris Arboretum as a living laboratory and the expertise of
arboretum staff, this course will bring students, novices and experts alike, to a better understanding of
plants. Session topics integrate both theoretical and hands-on practical work. Course assessment will
be based on weekly practical assignments and two exams.
Please note that this course takes place at the Morris Arboretum in the Chestnut Hill section of
Philadelphia and students are responsible for transporting themselves to and from the arboretum on
their own for class each week. For further information about the course, students may contact Cynthia
Skema (cskema@upenn.edu).

Page 8 of 12

LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE & REGIONAL PLANNING
(FA) {LARP}
756. Arboretum Management II: Evaluating Public Gardens. (B) Skema.
This interdisciplinary course looks at public gardens as a whole, studying these public institutions and
their performance in the four major services they undertake: research, horticultural display,
conservation and education/outreach. Students, of any level or discipline, begin the course by learning
what arboreta and botanic gardens are, how they function, and what role they fill in our society
through a series of lecture sessions at the Morris Arboretum. For the remainder of the semester, the
students take that knowledge into the field to apply what they have learned and evaluate some of the
many public gardens in "America's Garden Capital," the Philadelphia region, with expert instructors
from the Morris Arboretum as guides. Course assessment will be based on one exam, and a series of
essays pertaining to their garden evaluations. Garden evaluations and the written work can be tailored
to a particular subject of interest to a student, if pertinent within the public garden realm.
Please note that this course takes place at the Morris Arboretum in the Chestnut Hill section of
Philadelphia and students are responsible for transporting themselves to and from the arboretum on
their own or to other Philadelphia area public gardens as required for class each week. For further
information about the course, students may contact Cynthia Skema (cskema@upenn.edu).
760. Topics in Ecological Design. (C) Faculty.
These elective courses explore relevant topics in ecological design and new technologies as they
relate to contemporary landscape architecture. The courses explore topics such as ecology,
sustainability, habitat restoration, hydrology, green roof and green architecture technology, soil
technology, and other techniques pertinent to the construction of ecologically dynamic, functioning
landscapes. The teaching faculty are leading practitioners and researchers in the field. These courses
are open to all interested PennDesign students.
Recent topics have been: Large-Scale Land Reclamation Projects (annually since 2005), instructor:
William Young; Green Roof Systems (spring 2010-2014), instructor: Susan Weiler; Restoration
Ecology (fall biennially since 2004), instructor: David Robertson; Sustainable Development: The
Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park, London (fall 2012), instructor: John Hopkins; Ecological Economies
and Infrastructure (spring 2012), instructor: John Hopkins; Contemporary Issues in Sustainability: The
London 2012 Olympic Park and Other European Examples (fall 2011), instructor: John Hopkins;
James Ludwig (spring 2004); Sustainable Landscape Design for Watershed Protection (fall 2008,
2006, 2005, 2004,2003, 2002), instructor: Katrin Scholz-Barth; and Ecological Restoration in the
Urban Context (spring 2002, 2001), instructor: Deborah Marton.
SM 770. (HSPV620) Topics in Landscape Architecture History and Theory. (C) Faculty.
These advanced seminars explore central issues in the history and theory of landscape architecture
from the Renaissance to the present day. The focus is upon the cultural context of built works, their
relation to conceptual writings (contemporary with the designs as well as modern) and the dialogue
between modern professional practice and historical example and method.
Recent topics taught by Professor Hunt have been: Place & Peacefulness (fall 2012); Texts & Topics
(fall 2011); The Role of History in Contemporary Landscape Architecture (fall 2010); Understanding
Venice Research Seminar (spring 2009); Sculpture Parks and Sculpture in Parks (fall 2008); Six
Landscape Architects & What We Say About Them (spring 2007); Open Spaces & Open Places: The
Design and Use of American Landscapes (spring 2006), co-taught with Emily Cooperman; Reception,
or the After Life of Landscapes (Spring 2005), Land Art and Ian Hamilton Finlay (fall 2004), Lawrence
Halprin: Theory, Practice, Context & the Archival record (spring 2004) co-taught with Emily
Cooperman; French Landscape Architecture: Case Studies (spring 2003); Picturesque as Modernism
(spring 2002).
Recent topics taught by Professor Fabiani Giannetto have been: Landscape Theory and Criticism:
Six Case Studies (spring 2013); Villa Gardens and Villa Life: Cultural and Social Transformations
(spring 2012); and American Landscape Architecture & Its Sources (spring 2011).
Recent topics taught by Professor Aaron Wunsch have been: Therapeutic Landscapes in America
(spring 2014); The American Suburb: Real and Ideal (spring 2013).

Page 9 of 12

LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE & REGIONAL PLANNING
(FA) {LARP}
790. LARP Summer Institute: Landscape Operations. (L) Faculty. Course fee: $500.00
This one-week course, for entering three-year MLA students, introduces concepts and techniques for
analyzing, representing, and operating on landform, the fundamental medium of landscape
architecture. Students will learn representational and model-making techniques for conveying
topography, and will describe a series of landscape interventionss on a topographic surface. Through
models and drawings, students will develop an appreciation for the spatial implications of landform, for
landscape narrative, for the movement of water and people across the landscape, and for the
operation of reshaping the ground. Course enrollment is by permit only. Please contact Darcy Van
Buskirk (LARP Dept.) at darcyv@design.upenn.edu.
780. (LARP535) Topics in Theory and Design. (C) Faculty.
These advanced seminars explore advanced ideas in contemporary landscape architectural design
and theory. A special link is made between the analysis of built work and text to design practice and
the making of projects. Topics include the intersections of art, nature and creativity; practices of
analysis and criticism; ideas of urbanism and infrastructure; collaborative ventures and crossdisciplinarity; vision and visuality; and representational structures, both verbal and visual. These
courses fulfill the Landscape Architecture Theory III requirement and are open to all interested School
of Design students.
Recent topics have been: Classics Considered: The Craft and Criticism of Landscape Architecture
(fall 2015), instructors: Laurie Olin, Raffaella Fabiani Giannetto; Designing with Risk (spring 2016,
2015), instructors: Matthijs Bouw, Ellen Neises (2015); WORK: Aspects and Topics in Landscape
Architecture (spring 2016, 2015), instructor: Laurie Olin; Edge Operations (spring 2014), instructor:
Meg Studer; Landscape Thinking Research Seminar (spring 2013), instructor: Richard Weller;
Designed Ecologies (fall 2011-2013 ), instructor: Ellen Neises; Environment Regimes (spring 2013, fall
2011, 2010, 2009, spring 2007, 2006), instructor: Dilip da Cunha; Case Studies in Urbanism,
Landscape and Design (spring 2004-2014) instructor: David Gouverneur; Landscape Production and
Visual Culture (spring 2009), instructor: Claudia Taborda; Landscape and Globalization (spring 2010),
instructor: Claudia Taborda; Concepts & Theories in Contemporary Landscape Architecture (fall 2008,
2007, 2006, 2004, 2003), instructor: Anita Berrizbeitia; Paradoxical Spaces (spring 2008), instructors:
Linda Pollak and Sandro Marpillero; Contemporary European Landscape Architecture (fall
2007),instructor: Joseph Disponzio;
796. Independent Studio. (S) Faculty.
An independent studio may be undertaken in the final semester but is not required. The independent
studio is intended to provide highly motivated students who have demonstrated their ability to work
independently with the opportunity to pursue topics that extend the boundaries of the profession. For
permission, students must prepare a written proposal in the preceding semester and apply for
approval from the faculty. Details available in Landscape Architecture department office.
999. Independent Study. (S) Faculty.
An independent study may be taken for elective credit at any point during the degree program for a
letter grade. For permission, students must prepare a written proposal in the preceding semester and
obtain a Landscape Architecture faculty advisor to oversee their work. Details are available in the
Landscape Architecture department office.

Summer Institutes

Page 10 of 12

LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE & REGIONAL PLANNING
(FA) {LARP}
791. LARP Summer Institute: Landscape Operations. (L) Faculty. Course fee: $500.00
This one-week course, for entering three-year MLA students, introduces the fundamental tools and
techniques of hand drawing for landscape architects. Exercises will range from architectural drafting
and measured site observation, to constructed section and projective landscape imagination. The
class will instrcut students in the fundamental concepts of scale, measure, graphic hierarchy, line and
texture, and explore the representation of geology, built form and vegetation. Students will begin to
develop a visual vocabulary and become familiar with representational methods and techniques that
they will continue to explore throughout the Summer Institute and into the fall semester. Course
enrollment is by permit only. Please contact Darcy Van Buskirk (LARP Dept.) at
darcyv@design.upenn.edu.
792. LARP Summer Institute: Natural Systems (3-year students). (L) Willig. Course fee: $500.00
This four-day session for entering three-year MLA students will provide an introduction to the varied
physiographic provinces and associated plant communities of the greater Philadelphia region. Through
a review of available mapping and on-site study we will characterize and consider the connections
between climate, geology, topography, hydrology, soils, vegetation, wildlife, and disturbance, both
natural and anthropogenic. With a focus on plants students will begin to develop a familiarity with the
local flora (native and non-native) including plant species identification, preferred growing conditions,
and potential for use. Field trips will include visits to the Inner Coastal Plain and Piedmont. Course
enrollment is by permit only. Please contact Darcy Van Buskirk (LARP Dept.) at
darcyv@design.upenn.edu.
793. LARP Summer Institute: Landform and Grading Workshop. (L) Olgyay. Course fee: $500.00
The reading and shaping of landform is an elemental tool in the practice of landscape architecture.
The act of grading design - the shaping and sculpting of landform - is both art and science. This fourday session for entering two-year MLA students aims to provide an appreciation of landform as both
an evocative component in the design vocabulary and as a critical tool in resolving difficult design
problems. Basic techniques and strategies of grading design are introduced and reinforced, so that
grading design becomes an integral part of the student's design approach. This session is intended to
provide a concise overview of the principles and process of landform and grading design, and is
designed to prepare the entering two-year students for Workshop III. Course enrollment is by permit
only. Please contact Darcy Van Buskirk at darcyv@design.upenn.edu.
794. LARP Summer Institute: Natural Systems (2-year students). (L) Willig. Course fee: $500.00
This five-day session for entering two-year MLA students will provide an introduction to the varied
physiographic provinces and associated plant communities of the greater Philadelphia region. Through
a review of available mapping and on-site study we will characterize and consider the connections
between climate, geology, topography, hydrology, soils, vegetation, wildlife, and disturbance, both
natural and anthropogenic. With a focus on plants students will begin to develop a familiarity with the
local flora (native and non-native) including plant species identification, preferred growing conditions
and potential for use. Field trips will include visits to the Coastal Plan and Piedmont of New Jersey and
Pennsylvania. Course enrollment is by permit only. Please contact Darcy Van Buskirk (LARP Dept.) at
darcyv@design.upenn.edu.

Page 11 of 12

LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE & REGIONAL PLANNING
(FA) {LARP}
795. LARP Summer Institute: Computing Introduction and Academic Writing. (L) VanDerSys/
Fleming. Course fee: $500.00
The Intro to Computing session introduces students to the facilities of digital media as the primary
mode of design visual communication. The course provides a short, yet intensive, hands-on inquiry
into the production and expression of digital media that is essential for all designers. Through a series
of working labs, students learn various software applications and associated techniques to execute
precise two-dimensional representations of three-dimensional concepts. Students also learn the
PennDesign systems, network basics and computer lab procedures.
In the Academic Writing session, students will also receive a basic introduction to research
methods, research resources, academic writing, citation formats and standards expected by the
School of Design. Course enrollment is by permit only. Please contact Darcy Van Buskirk at
darcyv@design.upenn.edu.

Page 12 of 12

