LATIN
(AS) {LATN}

599. INDEPENDENT STUDY.
SM 604. LATIN SEMINAR.
SM 620. Pliny's Natural History. Cynthia Damon.
We will read selections from Pliny's monumental Natural History with attention to language, literary
tradition, historical context, and intellectual impact.

GREEK (GREK)
SM 101. Elementary Latin I. (A) Staff.
An introduction to the Latin language for beginners. Students begin learning grammar and
vocabulary, with practical exercises in reading in writing. By the end of the course students will be
able to read and analyze simple Latin texts, including selected Roman inscriptions in the Penn
Museum.
SM 102. Elementary Latin II. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): LATN 101 or equivalent.
Prerequisite(s): LATN 101 or equivalent. Completes the introduction to the Latin language begun in
101. By the end of the course students will have a complete working knowledge of Latin grammar, a
growing vocabulary, and experience in reading Julius Caesar's account of the invasion of Britain.
SM 112. Intensive Elementary Latin. (L) Staff.
An accelerated introduction to the Latin language for beginners, equivalent in scope to the first year
of Latin (101+102). Ideal for students with some background in learning languages, or who need to
learn Latin rapidly. Students begin learning grammar and vocabulary, with practical exercises in
reading in writing. By the end of the course students will have a complete working knowledge of Latin
grammar, a growing vocabulary, and experience in reading selected inscriptions in the Penn Museum
and Julius Caesar's account ofthe Roman invasion of Britain.
SM 203. Readings in Latin Prose. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): LATN 102 or equivalent.
Prerequisite(s): LATN 102 or equivalent (such as placement score of 550). Introduction to continuous
reading of unadapted works by Latin authors in prose(e.g., Cornelius Nepos, Cicero, Pliny), in
combination with a thorough review of Latin grammar. By the end of the course students will have
thorough familiarity with the grammar, vocabulary, and style of the selected authors, will be able to
tackle previously unseen passages by them, and will be able to discuss questions of language and
interpretation.
SM 204. Introduction to Latin Poetry. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): LATN 203 or equivalent.
Prerequisite(s): LATN 203 or equivalent (such as placement score of 600). Continuous reading of
several Latin authors in poetry (e.g., Ovid, Virgil, Horace) as well as some more complex prose, in
combination with ongoing review of Latin grammar. By the end of the course students will have
thorough familiarity with the grammar, vocabulary, and style and style of the selected authors, will be
able to tackle previously unseen unseen passages by them, and will be able to discuss language and
interpretation. Note: Completion of Latin 204 with C- or higher fulfills Penn's Foreign Language
Requirement.

Page 1 of 3

LATIN
(AS) {LATN}
SM 212. Intensive Intermediate Latin. (L) Staff. Completion of this course fulfills the Penn language
requirement. For further information on Penn's Latin curriculum, including placement and language
requirement, visit the Classical Studies department website.
Prerequisite(s): LATN 102 or equivalent (such as placement score of 550). Accelerated introduction
to reading of Latin authors, at twice the normal pace, equivalent in scope to second-year Latin
(203-204). Ideal for undergraduates or graduate students from Penn or elsewhere who have
completed the equivalent of one year Greek (e.g., GREK 112). Readings in simpler prose and poetry
(e.g., Cornelius Nepos, Ovid), then in more challenging prose and poetry (e.g., Cicero, Pliny, Virgil,
Horace), in combination with a thorough review of Latin grammar. By the end of the course students
will have thorough familiarity with the grammar, vocabulary, and style of the selected authors, will be
able to tackle previously unseen passages by them, and will be able to discuss language and
interpretation. Note: Completion of Latin 212 with C- or higher fulfills Penn's Foreign Language
Requirement.
SM 309. Topics in Latin Literature: Catullus. (M) Damon.Prerequisite(s): Reading knowledge of
Latin or permission of instructor.
This course is for those who have completed Latin 204, Latin 212, or equivalent (such as placement
score of 650, or AP score of 4 or 5). Close reading and discussion of a Latin author or a particular
genre of latin literature. Topics will vary each semester, and the course may be repeated for credit.
Assignments will include syntactic and literary analysis on a daily basis, a midterm, a paper, and a
final exam. Topic for Spring 2016: Catullus
399. Supervised Study in Latin Literature. (C) Staff.
This course is taken by students doing independent work with a faculty advisor, such as students
approved to work on a senior research paper in pursuit of honors in the major.
401. Latin for Advanced Students. (C) Staff.
For graduate students in other departments needing individualized study in Latin literature.
SM 409. Readings in Latin Literature. (M) Staff.
An advanced reading and discussion seminar on varying subjects in Latin literature: authors, genres
or topics. Focus will vary each semester, and the course may be repeated for credit.
SM 503. Historical Grammar of Latin. (M) Ringe/Cardona.Prerequisite(s): A fluent reading
knowledge of Latin.
Investigation of the grammar of Classical Latin from the viewpoint of historical linguistics. The course
will offer historical explanations for numerous structural peculiarities of the Latin language and
anomalies of Latin grammar, touch on the relationship of Latin with other languages, and incidentally
introduce the student to some basic concepts of language analysis likely to be useful in teaching
Latin and learning other languages.
SM 540. The Latin Text: Language and Style. (M) Ker.
What do we need to read texts in Latin? In these courses we read just one prose text and one poetic
text, or a very limited number of texts and passages, with a focus on language and formal analysis
(such as diction, grammar, stylistics, metrics, rhetoric, textual criticism). A range of exercises will be
used to develop this, including composition, lexical studies, recitation, memorization, exegesis,
written close-readings, and sight-translation.

Page 2 of 3

LATIN
(AS) {LATN}
SM 541. Latin Literary History. (M) James Ker.
In this course we survey an extensive range of readings in a variety of authors in both prose and
poetry, and consider the problems and opportunities involved in literary history.
SM 600. Graduate Latin Seminar. (A) Damon.
Topics will vary
Fall 2014 topic: This course will explore Suetonius' 'Lives of the Caesars' together with the
anonymous late antique text commonly referred to as the 'Scriptores Historiae Augustae'. It will
examine both the genre of imperial biography as it is manifested in these two texts and the
possibilities they offer for the reconstruction of political, cultural, and social histories of the periods in
question.
SM 601. Graduate Latin Prose. (M) Staff.
Topics will vary
SM 602. (COML600) Graduate Latin Poetry: Ennius. (M) Farrell.
Ennius writings, and particularly his epic poem Annales, proved to be foundational for many genres
of Latin literature. Editions of his work by Jocelyn (tragedies) and Skutsch ( Annales ) have attracted
more and more critical attention to these works in recent years. A spate of criticism over the past few
years considers Ennius from a variety of points of view, including some that call for a radical
reassessment of basic assumptions concerning the Annales in particular. The purpose of this
seminar is to introduce students to Ennius, to acquaint them with the tools and methods they will
need to study Ennius in depth, and to involve them in current debates surrounding the poet.
SM 609. (HIST535) Problems in Ancient History. (A) Grey.
A separate topic is offered in either the history of Ancient Near East, Greece or Rome.
999. Independent Study. (C) Staff.
For doctoral candidates.

Page 3 of 3

