LEGAL STUDIES AND BUSINESS ETHICS
(WH) {LGST}
101. Introduction to Law and Legal Process. (C) Staff.
This course presents law as an evolving social institution, with special emphasis on the legal
regulation of business. It considers basic concepts of law and legal process, in the U.S. and other legal
systems, and introduces the fundamentals of rigorous legal analysis. An in-depth examination of
contract law is included.
202. (LGST802) Law of Corporate Management and Finance. (C) Constan, Orts.
This course provides an introduction to the law of corporate management and finance, focusing on
large publicly held corporations. It is presented from the perspective that before too long virtually all
students will serve on one or more corporate boards of directors and that each should, therefore, know
about the duties owed by directors and officers to those toward whom they bear a fiduciary duty. The
course covers the basic obligations of corporate directors and managers under state corporate law
and the federal securities laws. It also considers the rights and responsibilities of other major stake
holders in the governance of public corporations, including shareholders, creditors/bondholders,
employees (including corporate executives), investment bankers, corporate lawyers, and accountants.
Particular attention is given to the law of mergers and acquisitions. Important issues of social policy
concerning large business corporations are also discussed.
204. (LGST804, REAL204, REAL804) Real Estate Law. (C) Staff.
See Real Estate, REAL 204
205. (LGST805, MKTG260, MKTG760) Law of Marketing and Antitrust. (C) Cornell.
The course explores the legal aspects of competition. The aim is to understand what legal obligations
a business organization owes to its competitors and consumers. In particular, the course focuses on
permissible and impermissible marketing tactics, pricing strategies, use of intellectual property
(including patents, copyrights, and trademarks), and exertion of market dominance. The focus is
primarily on U.S. law, but the challenges posed by diverse domestic, foreign, and international regimes
will also be discussed. The course is useful to students interested in marketing strategy or competitive
business strategy, and, more broadly, to anyone desiring to understand the legal and public policy
issues relating to competitive business interaction.
206. (MGMT291, OIDD291) Negotiation and Conflict Resolution. (C) Staff.
This course examines the art and science of negotiation, with additional emphasis on conflict
resolution. Students will engage in a number of simulated negotiations ranging from simple one-issue
transactions to multi-party joint ventures. Through these exercises and associated readings, students
explore the basic theoretical models of bargaining and have an opportunity to test and improve their
negotiation skills.
207. (LGST809) The Sports Industry: Business and Legal Aspects. (C) Rosner, Shropshire.
This course examines various business disciplines as they apply to the sports industry. The course
provides the student with an overview of the business of the intercollegiate, Olympic and professional
sports enterprises. In addition, the course investigates the business related issues encountered by
managers of sports organizations and covers how business principles can be applied to effectively
address these issues.

Page 1 of 8

LEGAL STUDIES AND BUSINESS ETHICS
(WH) {LGST}
208. (LGST808, MGMT247) The Law at Work: Employment Law for Managers. (C) Weinstein.
This course is based on the principle that knowledge and understanding of employment law facilitate
(1) promotion of a workforce with a high degree of commitment to reaching business goals, (2) the
development of practical business solutions to problems arising in the workplace, (3) effective human
resources policy and procedures that comply with applicable laws. It provides students with an
introduction to the law of the workforce and examines the balance between business goals and
employment law compliance. The course examines the various employment laws with which
businesses must comply and the legal rights and responsibilities of employees and employers. The
emphasis is on laws concerning equal employment opportunity with respect to discrimination and
harassment because of sex, race, national origin, religion, sexual orientation, age, disability and other
characteristics protected by workforce laws; work-related privacy including investigations, electronic
communication and social media; employee misclassification; diversity and affirmative action; and the
legal and regulatoenvironment regarding immigration, wage and hour, leaves of absence, hiring,
termination and afterwards, the non-employee workforce, whistle blower concerns, labor/management
relations and collective bargaining.
210. Corporate Responsibility and Ethics. (C) Staff.
This course explores business responsibility from rival theoretical and managerial perspectives. Its
focus includes theories of ethics and their application to case studies in business. Topics include moral
issues in advertising and sales; hiring and promotion; financial management; corporate pollution;
product safety; and decision-making across borders and cultures.
211. (HCMG211, HCMG854, LGST811) Legal Aspects of Health Care. (C) Rosoff, Field.
This course offers a current and historical overview of the legal oversight and regulation of health care
delivery in the U.S. It examines principles and practical applications of the laws that affect the
operational decisions of health care providers, payors, and managers and that impact the development
of markets for health care products and services. Also considered are the social, moral, and ethical
issues encountered in trying to balance the interests, needs and rights of individuals against those of
society. For part of the term, the class will divide into two groups so that students can focus on their
choice of (a) health care management or (b) selected issues of patients' rights.
212. (BEPP212) Economic Analysis of Law. (C) Buccola.Prerequisite(s): Econ 001.
The course is designed to teach students how to think as an economist about legal rules; to evaluate
alternative legal rules against standards of economic efficiency and distributive justice; and to
understand the nature of the legal process and several specific areas of the law. With the use of
alternative texts, both deductive and inductive reasoning will be employed to study the formation and
interpretation of legal rules.
213. (LGST813) Legal Aspect of Entrepreneurship. (C) Hochstadter.
Legal Aspects of Entrepreneurship is a practical, hands-on course examining critical legal issues that
confront start-up and mature companies with a focus on entrepreneurship. Students will emerge
prepared to use law as a positive force for growth and success of their business plans, as well as to
manage and mitigate legal risk via company policies, contracts, insurance or ADR. They will also learn
when it is strategic and cost-effective to turn to legal counsel. Case studies incorporate current issues,
and real life client/courtroom experience. Topics cover intellectual property; non-competition, nondisclosure and invention assignment agreements; choice of entity and tax; venture capital and private
equity; mergers and acquisitions; bankruptcy; securities; discrimination; and independent contractors.
This course will prove useful for any business career in providing an overview of business law and
social policy.

Page 2 of 8

LEGAL STUDIES AND BUSINESS ETHICS
(WH) {LGST}
214. (LGST814) International Business Transactions. (C) Nichols.
This course aims to familiarize students with and prepare students for the conduct of international
transactions. Students will work their way through a series of hypothetical trade transactions, placed
against a background of concepts and general theories. Students will take a hypothetical firm through
a series of possible transnational investments, again after discussion of concepts and general
theories. Throughout, the course will discuss issues of importance to emerging economies. Students
should be able to make thoughtful choices rather than simply reciting bullet points about international
business transactions.
215. (LGST815, MGMT213, MGMT713) Environmental Management: Law & Policy. (C) Orts, Light.
This course provides an introduction to environmental management by focusing on foundational
concepts of environmental law and policy and how they affect business decisions. The primary aim of
the course is to give students a deeper practical sense of the important relationship between business
and the natural environment, the existing legal and policy framework of environmental protection, and
how business managers can think about managing their relationship with both the environment and
the law.
220. (LGST820) International Business Ethics. (C) Staff.
This course is a multidisciplinary, interactive study of business ethics within a global economy. A
central aim of the course is to enable students to develop a framework to address ethical challenges
as they arise within and across different countries. Alternative theories about acting ethically in global
environments are presented, and critical current issues are introduced and analyzed. Examples
include bribery, global sourcing, environmental sustainability, social reports, intellectual property, ecommerce, and dealing with conflicting standards and values across cultures. As part of this study, the
course considers non-Western ethical traditions and practices as they relate to business.
216. Emerging Economies. (C) Nichols.
This course explores important issues in conducting business internationally in and with emerging
economies. Much of the course attempts to define emerging economies and to understand the
changes occurring in these countries. The course also examines the position of emerging economies
in the global context, and how broad social issues affect the development of emerging economies and
the ability to establish relationships or conduct business in emerging economies.
218. (AFRC218) Diversity and the Law. (C) Anderson.
The goal of this course is to study the role the law has played, and continues to play, in addressing the
problems of racial discrimination in the United States. Contemporary issues such as racial profiling,
affirmative action, and diversity will all be covered in their social and legal context. The basis for
discussion will be assigned texts, articles, editorials and cases. In addition, interactive videos will also
be used to aid class discussion. Course requirements will include a term paper and class case
presentations.

Page 3 of 8

LEGAL STUDIES AND BUSINESS ETHICS
(WH) {LGST}
219. Law and Policy in International Business. (C) Zaring.
This course introduces students to the legal frameworks for regulating international business national, regional, and international. Topics include mechanisms for dispute resolution, different
standards on assigning nationality, jurisdictional and choice of law problems, controversies regarding
the treatment of incoming foreign direct investment and expropriation of foreign-owned businesses,
patterns in extraterritoriality, problems of clashing legal standards affecting areas like labor and the
environment, and projects for creating more uniform rules governing the conduct of international
business. Throughout students will be encouraged to evaluate the policy dimensions of laws and to
develop their own critical perspectives regarding these.
221. Constitutional Law and Free Enterprise. (C) Sepinwall.
The course explores the fundamentals of U.S. constitutional doctrine and adjudication, with an
emphasis on commercial and business issues and implications of constitutional law. The course starts
by considering the Constitution and the structure and relationship of the governmental entities it
establishes and upon which it depends. Special attention is given to the role of the federal courts,
especially the Supreme Court, in interpreting and applying constitutional principles. From this
foundation, the course moves on to examine in detail the major economic and business implications of
constitutional law in different eras of the nation's history. A core theme is how historical events and
changing notions of public policy have affected and been affected by the evolution of constitutional
doctrine.
222. (OIDD222) Internet Law & Policy. (C) Werbach.
The Internet has become central to business and daily life. This course looks at how courts,
legislatures, and regulators confront the major legal issues that the Internet poses. The fundamental
challenge is that law comes from governments and other institutions in specific places, but the Internet
is global and virtual. Conflicts such as the shutdown of the Napster peer-to-peer file-sharing service
and the debate over "network neutrality" regulations for broadband access illustrate the challenge.
How does the legal system think about Google, Skype, Twitter, and Facebook? How should it?
The material in the course ranges from the foundations of cyberlaw, developed during the ecommerce boom of the 1990s, to current leading-edge questions around social networks, usergenerated content, location-based services, cloud computing, and broadband platforms. Major topics
include: how legally-enforceable contracts are made online; how courts determine jurisdiction over
online transactions; intellectual property rules around digital assets such as music, video, and online
texts; control over Internet domain names; liability of intermediaries such as Internet Service Providers
and search engines; and online privacy protections. No pre-existing legal or technical knowledge is
required.
223. (LGST807) Securities Regulation. (C) Buccola.
The course examines the federal securities laws and the operation of the Securities Exchange
Commission. The legal responsibilities of corporate managers, accountants, underwriters, and brokerdealers, occasioned by the securities regulatory scheme, will be investigated. Students will be
encouraged to evaluate, from a managerial perspective, the various aspects of securities regulation
studied. The course will discuss the recent financial crisis and ask the question whether enhanced
securities regulation will prevent such a crisis in the future. The material covered in the course will
provide familiarity with the basic legal structure of securities regulation and will assist in understanding
the current policy issues in securities law. The course should help students to develop the ability to
read and learn further in the field and to improve their effectiveness of communication with attorneys. It
will also suggest ways of detecting instances in which an attorney should be consulted. The course is
particularly useful for those students pursuing careers in corporate finance, investment banking,
mergers and acquisitions, sales and trading, venture capital, private equity, entrepreneurship,
accounting, corporate management, and real estate.

Page 4 of 8

LEGAL STUDIES AND BUSINESS ETHICS
(WH) {LGST}
228. Sports Law. (C) Staff.
This course focuses on the areas of association, contract, constitutional, labor, antitrust, and agency
law as they apply to the sports industry. This course exposes the student to many of the legal issues
facing stakeholders in sport organizations. Special attention is given to the regulation of professional
sports leagues promoting competitive balance, as well as antitrust law and labor-management
relations dealing with the organization structure of sports leagues. The course also takes an inside
look at previous and newly formed collective bargaining agreements and the use of Salary Cap or lack
thereof in professional sports leagues. The development of effective communication skills will be
emphasized through class presentations, written assignments, and quizzes; leadership and
interpersonal communications will be cultivated through small group projects and meetings, and
critical thinking and problem solving skills will be fostered through the careful study of case law
impacting the sports industry in a variety of facets.
224. (LGST524) Human Rights and Globalization. (C) Bellace.
The 2000 UN Global Compact has confirmed the role of TNCs as central actors in the UN system of
international human rights law, but whether their role should be voluntary or legally mandated remains
in dispute. This course introduces students to how globalization has led to projects for expanding
international human rights law to capture the operations of TNCs and why this development is
opposed in many quarters. Competing perspectives on the pros and cons of imposing human rights
responsibilities on TNCs and on the respective roles that businesses and governments should play will
be examined. The Positions of various governments, businesses, international institutions, academics,
and NGOs will be considered, and a number of illustrative case studies will be analyzed.
226. Markets, Morality & the Future of Capitalism. (C) Cornell.
Markets play a central role in the life of a capitalist democracy. But is this a good thing? Should we let
markets decide who is rich and who is poor? Who makes decisions and who follows them? Whose
ideas get heard and whose ideas do not? The goal of this class will be to examine the market from the
perspective of various social values to see whether we should want a market system and, if so, what
kind of market system we should want. Among the issues we will examine are the following. Does the
market contribute to the common good? If so, how? Does the market conflict with the idea that all
human beings are of equal value? What is the relation between the market and freedom? Does the
market liberate us or oppress us? Can we reconcile the market with our democratic ideals? What role
should corporations play in a healthy democracy? What role should markets play in an increasingly
globalized world? We will read several important philosophers, economists and political theorists
writing on these issues, including Adam Smith, John Rawls, Amartya Sen, Friedrich Hayek, Karl Marx,
Robert Nozick, Jurgen Habermas, and others. Grades will be based on three papers and class
participation.
227. Literature of Success. (C) Shell.
This course explores the history, literature, and philosophy of two age-old questions: what does it
mean to be successful and how does one achieve this elusive goal? It surveys some of the classics of
the "success" genre - from Benjamin Franklin's Autobiography in the 18th century to Dale Carnegie's
How to Win Friends and Influence People and Marcus Buckingham's Now, Discover Your Strengths in
the 20th and 21st centuries. Case studies of remarkable achievements in business and society and
Arthur Miller's play Death of a Salesman provide additional contexts within which to reflect on the
questions at the center of the course. Students will keep a personal journal and use web-based tools
to examine their own character strengths, talents, and achievement orientations. Grading is based on
class attendance and participation, reading response papers, personal journals on assigned topics
involving self reflection, a mid-term paper on an assigned research subject related to success, and a
final, longer paper exploring, based on course readings and original research, each students personal
philosophy of success. No final exam.

Page 5 of 8

LEGAL STUDIES AND BUSINESS ETHICS
(WH) {LGST}
230. Social Impact and Responsibility: Foundations. Gordon, Nichols.
What role can business play in helping to meet global societal needs, whether it involves the
environment, improving health, expanding education or eradicating poverty? Is there any responsibility
on the part of business to help meet those needs? What are models of successful business
engagement in this area? How should success be measured? Are there limits to what businesses can
and should do, and what institutional changes will enable businesses and entrepreneurs to better
succeed?
This survey course provides students the opportunity to engage in the critical analysis of these and
other questions that lie at the foundation of social impact and responsibility as an area of study. The
course involves case studies, conceptual issues, and talks by practitioners. The course is designed to
help students develop a framework to address the question: How should business enterprises and
business thinking be engaged to improve society in areas not always associated with business? The
course is required for the secondary concentration in Social Impact and Responsibility
240. (OIDD240) Gamification for Business. (C) Werbach.
Gamification means using the techniques of digital game design to serve business and social impact
objectives. The video game industry is now bigger than Hollywood because well-designed games take
advantage of both technology and psychology. Gamification takes the elements of games and applies
them to real-world environments. Major companies and fast-growing startups now use it in marketing,
human resources, innovation processes, healthand wellness, education, and customer engagement.
This course examines the mechanisms of gamification their effective use in business or other
contexts. No particular technical skills or game knowledge are required. The focus is on gamification
as a design practice, which it rooted in research on human motivation and implemented through online
systems and social media. To illustrate these concepts, the course itself will be gamified.
524. (LGST224) Human Rts & Globalization. (C) Bellace.
The 2000 UN GLobal Compact has confirmed the role of TNCs as central actors in the UN system of
international human rights law, but whether their role should be voluntary or legally mandated remains
in dispute. This course introduces students to how globaliztion has led to projects for expanding
international human rights law to capture the operations of TNCs and why this development is
opposed in many quarters. Competing perspectives on the pros and cons of imposing human rights
responsibilities on TNCs and on the respective roles that businesses and governments should play will
be examined. The positions of various governments, businesses, international institutions, academics,
and NGOs will be considered, and a number of illustrative case studies will be analyzed.
241. (LGST641) Theories of the Business Enterprise. (C) Orts.
What is a business firm? How did various forms of business, including the corporation, arise
historically? How do contemporary economic and financial theories explain how business firms evolve,
grow, and die? What are the legal underpinnings of the forms of business enterprise, ranging from
sole proprietorships to partnerships to family-owned enterprises to multinational corporate groups?
How do business firms relate to politics and government, as well as religion? What about the
environment? This interdisciplinary course offers an introduction to pursuing answers to these
questions. Students will gain perspective on the nature of business enterprises from different points of
view that will be useful in further research, as well as having practical application. Ubiquitous
economic concepts such as agency costs, principal-agent relationships, transaction costs, and
influence costs will be studied. Different legal structures of firms will also be introduced, including new
hybrid organizations such as benefit corporations, which seek to meld non-profit and profit objectives.
In the course, we will read high-profile U.S. Supreme Court cases such as Citizens United and
Hobby Lobby and debate appropriate boundaries (or not) between business and politics, as well as
business and religion. Business ethics and the nature of any social responsibilities owed by business
and business people will be topics too.

Page 6 of 8

LEGAL STUDIES AND BUSINESS ETHICS
(WH) {LGST}
292. (MGMT292, OIDD292) Advanced Negotiations. (C) Schweitzer, Staff.Prerequisite(s): LGST 206
Negotiations.
This course is designed to teach negotiation principles and to enable students to develop their
negotiation skills. This course assumes familiarity with the basic negotiation concepts covered in the
prerequisite for this course: Negotiations.
In this course, we extend the study and practice of negotiations and we develop a deeper
understanding for how specific aspects of the negotiation process (e.g., emotions, deadlines, trust
violations) impact outcomes. Through course lectures, readings, and case exercises, students will
develop a rich framework for thinking about the negotiation process and acquire tools for guiding the
negotiation process.
SM 299. Seminar in Law and Society. (C) Staff. See department for current offerings
A study of the nature, functions, and limits of law as an agency of societal policy. Each semester an
area of substantive law is studied for the purpose of examining the relationship between legal norms
developed and developing in the area and societal problems and needs.
641. (LGST241) Theories of the Business Enterprise. (C) Orts.
What is a business firm? How did various forms of business, including the corporation, arise
historically? How do contemporary economic and financial theories explain how business firms evolve,
grow, and die? What are the legal underpinnings of the forms of business enterprise, ranging from
sole proprietorships to partnerships to family-owned enterprises to multinational corporate groups?
How do business firms relate to politics and government, as well as religion? What about the
environment? This interdisciplinary course offers an introduction to pursuing answers to these
questions. Students will gain perspective on the nature of business enterprises from different points of
view that will be useful in further research, as well as having practical application. Ubiquitous
economic concepts such as agency costs, principal-agent relationships, transaction costs, and
influence costs will be studied. Different legal structures of firms will also be introduced, including new
hybrid organizations such as benefit corporations, which seek to meld non-profit and profit objectives.
In the course, we will read high-profile U.S. Supreme Court cases such as Citizens United and
Hobby Lobby and debate appropriate boundaries (or not) between business and politics, as well as
business and religion. Business ethics and the nature of any social responsibilities owed by business
and business people will be topics too.
SM 920. Ethics in Business and Economics. (M) Staff. Ph.D Course
The seminar explores the growing academic literature in business ethics. It also provides participants
an opportunity to investigate an ethical issue of their choosing in some depth, using their field of
specialty as context. The seminar assumes no previous exposure to business ethics. Different theories
and frameworks for investigating issues will be discussed. In turn, these theories will be applied to a
range of issues, both domestic and international. Such issues include: corruption in host countries, the
management of values in modern corporations, the ethical status of the corporation, ethics in
sophisticated financial transactions (such as leveraged derivative transactions), and gender
discrimination in the context of cultural differences. Literature not only from business ethics, but from
professional and applied ethics, law, and organizational behavior will be discussed. Often, guest
speakers will address the seminar. At the discretion of the class, special topics of interest to the class
will be examined. Students will be expected to write and present a major paper dealing with a current
issue within their major field. The course is open to students across fields, and provides integration of
ideas across multiple business disciplines.

Page 7 of 8

LEGAL STUDIES AND BUSINESS ETHICS
(WH) {LGST}
SM 921. Foundations of Business Law. (M) Staff. Ph.D Course
This course will introduce students to basic jurisprudential discussions and debates that relate to
understanding business in society. Topics will include a general overview of the nature of law and its
relationship to ethics; theories of contract, torts, and property; criminal law as it applies to business
situations; and theories of the business enterprise and its regulation. Selected topics will also be
chosen in accordance with the interest of participants in the seminar.

Page 8 of 8

