LINGUISTICS
(AS) {LING}
American Sign Language and Irish Gaelic courses are sponsored by the Department of
Linguistics and offered through the Penn Language Center. Please see http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/
plc/

Undergraduate Courses
L/R 001. Introduction to Linguistics. (C) Natural Science & Mathematics Sector. Class of 2010 and
beyond. Staff.
A general introduction to the nature, history and use of human language, speech and writing. Topics
include the biological basis of human language, and analogous systems in other creatures; relations
to cognition, communication, and social organization; sounds, forms and meanings in the world's
languages; the reconstruction of linguistic history and the family tree of languages; dialect variation
and language standardization; language and gender; language learning by children and adults; the
neurology of language and language disorders; the nature and history of writing systems. Intended for
any undergraduate interested in language or its use, this course is also recommended as an
introduction for students who plan to major in linguistics.
SM 051. Proto-Indo European Language and Society. (M) History & Tradition Sector. All classes.
Noyer. Freshman Seminar
Most of the languages now spoken in Europe, along with some languages of Iran, India and central
Asia, are thought to be descended from a single language known as Proto-Indo-European, spoken at
least six thousand years ago, probably in a region extending from north of the Black Sea in modern
Ukraine east through southern Russia. Speakers of Proto-Indo-European eventually populated Europe
in the Bronze Age, and their societies formed the basis of the classical civilizations of Greece and
Rome, as well as of the Celtic, Germanic and Slavic speaking peoples. What were the Proto-IndoEuropeans like? What did they believe about the world and their gods? How do we know?
Reconstruction of the Proto-Indo-European language, one of the triumphs of comparative and
historical linguistics in the 19th and 20th centuries, allows us a glimpse into the society of this
prehistoric people.
In this seminar students will, through comparison of modern and ancient languages, learn the basis
of this reconstruction -- the comparative method of historical linguistics -- as well as explore the
culture and society of the Proto-Indo-Europeans and their immediate descendants. In addition, we will
examine the pseudo-scientific basis of the myth of Aryan supremacy, and study the contributions of
archaeological findings in determining the "homeland" of the Indo-Europeans. No prior knowledge of
any particular language is necessary. This seminar should be of interest to students considering a
major in linguistics, anthropology and archaeology, ancient history or comparative religion. (Also fulfills
Cross-Cultural Analysis.)
SM 054. Bilingualism in History. (A) Freshman Seminar
This course introduces the foundations of linguistics - the scientific study of language - through
exploration of multilingualism in the USA and in different societies around the world.
Contacts between groups of people speaking different languages are documented from earliest
records, and around the world it remains the norm to find more than one language in regular use in a
single community. In this course we will see that multilingualism is a catalyst for linguistic change:
sometimes languages are lost; sometimes new languages are created; sometimes the structure of a
language is radically altered. We will consider: Which parts of linguistic structure are most susceptible
to change under conditions of bilingualism? Does language contact - whether a result of trade,
education, migration, conquest, or intermarriage - influence language structure in predictable ways?
How do individual speakers handle multiple languages? How have attitudes to speakers of multiple
languages changed through history? How have socio-historical events shaped the linguistic situation
in the USA?

Page 1 of 16

LINGUISTICS
(AS) {LING}
L/R 102. Introduction to Sociolinguistics. (B) Society Sector. All classes. Tamminga. Satisfies
Quantitative Data Analysis
Human language viewed from a social and historical perspective. Students will acquire the tools of
linguistic analysis through interactive computer programs, covering phonetics, phonology and
morphology, in English and other languages. These techniques will then be used to trace social
differences in the use of language, and changing patterns of social stratification. The course will focus
on linguistic changes in progress in American society, in both mainstream and minority communities,
and the social problems associated with them. Students will engage in field projects to search for the
social correlates of linguistic behavior, and use quantitative methods to analyze the results.
103. Introduction to Language: Language Structure and Verbal Art. (A) Arts & Letters Sector. All
Classes. Ringe.
The purpose of this course is to explore the relationship between linguistic structure and the use of
language for artistic purposes. The syllabus is organized as a sequence of units, each built around a
particular theme. These include the sound structure of poetry (meter, rhyme, and other linguistic
patterns in Jabberwocky, the Odyssey, Shakespeare, the Troubadours, and others); how precise
linguistic data can be used to solve an outstanding literary problem (determining the approximate date
when Beowulf was composed); and the structure of folktales of various cultures and of narratives of
everyday experience.
L/R 105. (CIS 140, COGS001, PHIL044, PSYC207) Introduction to Cognitive Science. (A)
Brainard/Ungar. This is a Formal Reasoning course.
Cognitive Science is founded on the realization that many problems in the analysis of human and
artificial intelligence require an interdisciplinary approach. The course is intended to introduce
students to the problems and characteristic concepts of Cognitive Science, drawing on formal and
empirical approaches from the parent disciplines of computer science, linguistics, neuroscience,
philosophy and psychology. The topics covered include Perception, Action, Learning, Language,
Knowledge Representation, and Inference, and the relations and interactions between such modules.
The course shows how the different views from the parent disciplines interact, and identifies some
common themes among the theories that have been proposed. The course pays particular attention to
the distinctive role of computation in such theories, and provides an introduction to some of the main
directions of current research in the field.
L/R 106. Introduction to Formal Linguistics. (A) Staff. This is a Formal Reasoning course.
This course is intended as an introduction to the application of formal language theory, automata
theory, and other computational models to the understanding of natural human language. Topics
include regular languages and finite state automata; context-free languages and pushdown automata;
recursive transition networks; augmented transition networks; tree-adjoining grammars.
L/R 115. Writing Systems. (A) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Buckley.
The historical origin of writing in Sumeria, Egypt, China, and Mesoamerica; the transmission of writing
across languages and cultures, including the route from Phoenician to Greek to Etruscan to Latin to
English; the development of individual writing systems over time; the traditional classification of written
symbols (ideographic, logographic, syllabic, alphabetic); methods of decipherment; differences
between spoken and written language; how linguistic structure influences writing, and is reflected by it;
social and political aspects of writing; literacy and the acquisition of writing.

Page 2 of 16

LINGUISTICS
(AS) {LING}
120. Introduction to Speech Analysis. (C) Kuang. Satisfies Quantitative Data Analysis
This course focuses on experimental investigations of speech sounds. General contents include: the
fundamentals of speech production and perception; speech analysis tools and techniques; and topics
in phonetic studies. The course consists of integrated lectures and laboratory sessions in which
students learn computer techniques for analyzing digital recordings.
140. Construct a Language. (M) Legate.
In this course, students construct their own language, one that is compatible with what is known about
possible human languages. To this end, the course investigates language typology through lectures
and examination of grammars of unfamiliar languages. Topics include language universals, points of
choice in a fixed decision space, and dependencies among choices.
160. (AFRC160) Introduction to African American and Latino English. (A) Staff.
An introduction to the use and structure of dialects of English used by the African American and
Latino communities in the United States. It is an academically based service learning course. The field
work component involves the study of the language and culture of everyday life and the application of
this knowledge to programs for raising the reading levels of elementary school children.
230. (LING503) Sound Structure of Language. (B) Noyer.Prerequisite(s): Prerequisite: A prior
course in linguistics or permission of instructor.
An introduction to phonetics and phonology. Topics include articulatory phonetics (the anatomy of the
vocal tract; how speech sounds are produced); transcription (conventions for representing the sounds
of the world's languages); classification (how speech sounds are classified and represented
cognitively through distinctive features); phonology (the grammar of speech sounds in various
languages: their patterning and interaction) and syllable structure and its role in phonology.
240. Structure of a Language. (M) Staff.
Designed to apply linguistic principles to the grammatical analysis of a particular language, this course
focuses on a different language each time it is given, according to the decision of the instructor. It may
be taken by students with prior knowledge of the language in question who have not taken previous
courses in linguistics, and by students of linguistics who wish to explore a new language. The selected
language will be announced prior to pre-registration for any semester in which it is given.
241. Language in Native America. (M) Buckley.
This course is an introduction to linguistic perspectives on the languages native to the Americas (their
nature and distribution, typological similarities and differences), with an emphasis on North America.
The diverse languages of this region will be examined from the point of view of particular linguistic
phenomena, such as phonology, morphology, and syntax; and in addition we will study their historical
development and their place in culture, society, and thought.

Page 3 of 16

LINGUISTICS
(AS) {LING}
255. Formal Semantics and Cognitive Science. (M) Schwarz. NOTE TO PSYCHOLOGY MAJORS:
Ling 255 can be counted towards the 'Additional Psych Courses', as specified in the Undergraduate
Handbook. NOTE TO COGNITIVE SCIENCE MAJORS: Ling 255 counts towards Concentration 3:
Language and Mind
This course provides an introduction to the study of meaning in natural language. The first part of the
course introduces a formal perspective on meaning in terms of truth conditions as well as the basic
analytical tools necessary for this, primarily building on set theory and logic. The main part of the
course covers a range of empirical investigations of phenomena related to meaning using
experimental methods from psycholinguistics. Topics include a selection of issues on the semanticspragmatics interface, such as conversational implicatures, presuppositions, reference resolution and
perspective taking, and quantifier scope. Students will carry out a class project, possibly in groups, to
develop (and, if possible, carry out) an experimental study of meaning-related phenomena of their
own. Relevant tools for experimental design and the implementation of such studies will be introduced
along the way. This provides students with the opportunity to engage in a scientific investigation of
their own early on in their undergraduate career in a domain that is easily accessible and yet central to
the general enterprise of the cognitive sciences.
247. Structure of American Sign Language. Fisher/Santorini.Prerequisite(s): Ling 001 or permission
of instructor(s).
This course covers the linguistic structure of American Sign Language (ASL), including its phonology
(articulatory features, phonological constraints, nonmanuals), morphology (morphological constraints,
compounds, incorporation, borrowing), and syntax (syntactic categories, basic phrase structure,
common sentence types), Also discussed are the topics of classifiers and deixis. In keeping with the
comparative perspective of linguistic theory, parallels and differences between ASL and other
(primarily spoken) languages are pointed out where appropriate. Historical and sociolinguistic issues
are addressed where they are relevant to elucidating linguistic structure.
Though the course focuses on ASL, it necessarily touches on issues concerning sign languages
more generally, notably the possible effects of modality (sign vs. speech) on linguistic structure and
the implications of the signed modality for general linguistics.
Although the course does not presuppose knowledge of ASL, it does require acquaintance with
basic concepts of linguistics.
250. Introduction to Syntax. (B) Santorini.
This course is an introduction to current syntactic theory, covering the principles that govern phrase
structure (the composition of phrases and sentences), movement (dependencies between syntactic
constituents), and binding (the interpretation of different types of noun phrases). Although much of the
evidence discussed in the class will come from English, evidence from other languages will also play
an important role, in keeping with the comparative and universalist perspective of modern syntactic
theory.

Page 4 of 16

LINGUISTICS
(AS) {LING}
252. Logical Analysis of Language. (M) Clark.
Everyone seems to think that language and thought are somehow intimately related. But what, exactly,
is the relationship? For some people, language and thought are identical, so that pre-linguistic
creatures are completely incapable of thought. This course examines language as an instrument to
send and receive information. In part I, we will start with a computational approach to the problem of
how an information agent would extract and use information from language. That is, we will take
language to be an encoding of a mental content. The course considers some of the classic position
papers on artificial intelligence and then moves on to develop a compositional account of computing
meanings based on categorial grammar. We will, in addition, discuss some of the leading ideas in the
theory of artificial neural nets and concept formation, particularly prototype theory.
In part II, we will focus on compositional theories of meaning; we will pay particular attention to
categorial grammar, developing a strictly compositional theory of the encoding. In this section, we will
develop some ideas from dynamic semantics and pragmatic theories of presupposition and
implicature. In part III, we will explore reasons for supposing that meaning is largely social and not
purely a question of mental content. This will lead us to a critical consideration of linguistic relativity,
the idea that language can influence thought.
270. Language Acquisition. (M) Yang.
An introduction to language acquisition in children and the development of related cognitive and
perceptual systems. Topics include the nature of speech perception and the specialization to the
native language; the structure and acquisition of words; children's phonology; the development of
grammar; bilingualism and second language acquisition; language learning impairments; the biological
basis of language acquisition; the role in language learning in language change. Intended for any
undergraduate interested in the psychology and development of language.
SM 300. Tutorial in Linguistics. (A) Legate.Prerequisite(s): Senior status or permission of the
instructor. Majors only.
This tutorial allows students to deal in a concentrated manner with selected major topics in linguistics
by means of extensive readings and research. Two topics are studied during the semester, exposing
students to a range of sophisticated linguistic questions.
301. Conference. (C)
An independent study for majors in linguistics.
SM 302. (LING502) Linguistic Field Methods. (M) Buckley/Legate.Prerequisite(s): Ling 230 and Ling
250.
Instruction and practice in primary linguistic research, producing a grammatical sketch and a lexicon
through work with a native-speaker consultant and some reference materials. Consultant work is
shared with LING 502.
398. Senior Thesis. (C) Staff.
310. History of the English Language. (A) Ringe/Kroch.
This course traces the linguistic history of English from its earliest reconstructable ancestor, ProtoIndo-European, to the present. We focus especially on significant large-scale changes, such as the
restructuring of the verb system in Proto-Germanic, the intricate interaction of sound changes in the
immediate prehistory of Old English, syntactic change in Middle English, and the diversification of
English dialects since 1750.

Page 5 of 16

LINGUISTICS
(AS) {LING}
354. Language and Game Theory. (M) Clark.
This course is an introduction to game-theoretic pragmatics. It focuses on aspects of meaning that
follow from rational, strategic decision making. The course covers an introduction to the theory of
games with an emphasis on coordination games and cooperation. We develop a game theoretic
account of truth conditional semantics using zero-sum games. We then cover Gricean implicature;
focal points and coordination; polysemy vs homophony; and a game account of reference tracking and
pronoun interpretation.
380. (LING580) Introduction to Semantics. (A) Schwarz.Prerequisite(s): Ling 250.
This course provides an introduction to formal semantics for natural language. The main aim is to
develop a semantic system that provides a compositional interpretation of natural language
sentences. We discuss various of the aspects central to meaning composition, including function
application, modification, quantification, and binding, as well as issues in the syntax-semantics
interface. The basic formal tools relevant for semantic analysis, including set theory, propositional
logic, and predicate logic are also introduced.
404. Morphological Theory. (M) Embick.
This course will explore some issues concerning the internal structure of words. After a brief
introduction to some basic terms and concepts, we will discuss the interaction of morphology with
phonology. We will look both at how morphology conditions phonological rules and how phonology
conditions morphology. Then we will turn to the interaction of syntax and morphology. We will look at
some problems raised by inflectional morphology, clitics and compounds. The main requirement for
the class will be a series of homework exercises in morphological analysis and a short paper at the
end of the semester.
SM 411. Old English. (M) Kroch.
The main purpose of this course is to teach students to read Old English ("Anglo-Saxon"), chiefly but
not exclusively for research in linguistics. Grammar will be heavily emphasized; there will also be
lectures on the immediate prehistory of the language, since the morphology of Old English was made
unusually complex by interacting sound changes. In the first eight weeks we will work through Moore
and Knott's "Elements of Grammar" and learn the grammar; the remainder of the term will be devoted
to reading texts.
440. Pidgins and Creoles. (H)
The origins and development of pidgins (languages of intercommunication that have evolved for
practical reasons in situations of trade, conquest, or colonization, and spoken as second or auxiliary
languages) and creoles (languages with native speakers that have developed from previous pidgins);
relations between creoles and other languages; implications of creole studies for general theories of
language and language change.
SM 449. Language and Computation. (M) Yang.
The computational study of natural language and its implications for linguistic theories. Topics include
finite state tools, computational morphology and phonology, grammar and parsing, computational
models of language learning in children and machines.

Page 6 of 16

LINGUISTICS
(AS) {LING}
450. Languages in Contact. (I)
Multilingualism from a societal, individual, and linguistic point of view. The different types of contacts
between populations and between individuals which give rise to multilingualism. Second-language
acquisition and the problem of the "critical age." Cognitive and cultural aspects of multilingualism;
applications to the teaching of languages. "Bidialectalism." Code-switching (alternation), interference
and integration: the mutual influences of language in contact. Political and social aspects of
multilingualism.
SM 470. (AFRC262, AFST260, FOLK470, LALS260) Narrative Analysis. (M)
The course will develop our understanding of narrative structure on the basis of oral narratives of
personal experience, told by speakers from a wide range of geographic backgrounds and social
classes. It will link the principles governing oral narratives to the narratological examination of myth,
literature and film by Propp, Greimas, Prince, Chatman, and others.The principles that emerge from
the study of oral narrative will be re-examined in literary narrative, including Scandinavian, Greek and
Hebrew epics, medieval romances, film, and modern novels, with attention to the differences between
vernacular, literary and academic style. The class will then consider the work of psychologists on how
narratives are remembered and understood, based on the causal network theory of Trabasso, and
apply these principles to narratives written to teach children to read, particularly those designed to
reflect the cultural and linguistic framework of African American children.

Graduate Courses
SM 500. Research Workshop. (A) Embick.
This course is intended for advanced graduate students who are interested in developing a research
paper. Each student will present his or her topic several times during the semester as the analysis
develops, with feedback from the instructor and other students to improve the organization and
content of the analysis. The goal is an end product appropriate for delivery at a national conference or
submission to a journal.
510. Introduction to Historical and Comparative Linguistics. (A) Ringe.
Synchronic and diachronic systems. Analogic processes. Semantic change. Effects of contact. Internal
reconstruction. Comparative method and reconstruction.
SM 502. (LING302) Linguistic Field Methods. (M) Buckley/Legate.Prerequisite(s): LING 530 and
Ling 550.
Instruction and practice in primary linguistic research, producing a grammatical sketch and a lexicon
through work with a native-speaker consultant and some reference materials. Consultant work is
shared with LING 302. Each student will write a final paper on some aspect of the language.
503. (LING230) Sound Structure of Language. (B) Noyer.
An introduction to articulatory and acoustic phonetics; phonetic transcription; basic concepts and
methods of phonological analysis.
505. Research Topics. (C)
A reading course on specialized topics in linguistics. Arranged by instructor.

Page 7 of 16

LINGUISTICS
(AS) {LING}
511. Language Variation & Change. (B) Tamminga.Prerequisite(s): LING 510 or equivalent.
Speech communities as a focus for the understanding of language evolution and change: language
variation in time and space. The relationship between language structure and language use; between
language change and social change. Populations as differentiated by age, sex, social class, race, and
ethnicity, and the relationship of these factors to linguistic differentiation.
SM 515. Dynamics of Language. (C) Yang.Prerequisite(s): Ling 510.
This course introduces the tools, techniques, as well as current research on the approach to language
as a dynamical system, which seeks to fruitfully integrate linguistic theory, psycholinguistics, corpus
linguistics, and historical linguistics through the means of mathematical modeling. Topics include:
string processing, dynamical systems and stability, stochastic processes, mathematical models of
population dynamics, and dynamical models of language learning, processing, and change.
520. Introduction to Phonetics. (A) Liberman/Kuang.Prerequisite(s): An introductory course in
linguistics, or consent of instructor.
Speech: its linguistic transcription, its quantitative physical description, and its relationship to the
categories and dimensions of language structure and use. The physical basis of speech: acoustics,
vocal tract anatomy and physiology, hearing and speech perception, articulation and motor control.
Phonetic variation and change. Prosody: stress, intonation, phrasing speech rate. Phonetic
instrumentation, the design and interpretation of phonetic experiments, and the use of phonetic
evidence in linguistic research, with emphasis on computer techniques. Introduction to speech signal
processing. Speech technology: introduction to speech recognition, text-to-speech synthesis, speech
coding. This course will emphasize the phonetics of natural speech, and its connections to issues in
other areas of linguistics and cognitive science.
521. Introduction to Phonetics II. (B) Kuang/Liberman.Prerequisite(s): LING 520.
This is a methodology course, which focuses on how to conduct phonetics research using very large
speech corpora. Topics include scripting and statistical techniques, automatic phonetic analysis,
integration of speech technology in phonetics studies, variation and invariability in large speech
corpora, and revisiting classic phonetic and phonological problems from the perspective of corpus
phonetics.
525. (CIS 558) Computer Analysis and Modeling of Biological Signals and Systems. (A)
Liberman.
A hands-on signal and image processing course for non-EE graduate students needing these skills.
We will go through all the fundamentals of signal and image processing using computer exercises
developed in MATLAB. Examples will be drawn from speech analysis and synthesis, computer vision,
and biological modeling.
530. Phonology I. (A) Noyer.Prerequisite(s): LING 503 or equivalent.
First half of a year-long introduction to the formal study of phonology. Basic concepts in articulatory
phonetics; the distribution of sounds (phonemes and allophones); underlying and surface forms, and
how to relate them using both ordered-rule and surface-constraint approaches. The survey of
theoretical topics in this term includes distinctive features (context, organization, underspecification);
the autosegmental representation of tone; and the theory of phonological domains and their
interaction with morphological and syntactic constituency. Emphasizes hands-on analysis of a wide
range of data.

Page 8 of 16

LINGUISTICS
(AS) {LING}
531. Phonology II. (B) Buckley.Prerequisite(s): LING 530.
Second half of a year-long introduction; continues LING 530. Topics to be surveyed include syllable
structure and moraic theory; the prosodic hierarchy; the properties and representation of geminates;
templatic and prosodic morphology; reduplication and emergence of the unmarked; and metrical
phonology (properties of stress, foot typology, and issues of constituency). Emphasizes hands-on
analysis of a wide range of data.
SM 538. Computational Methods in Linguistic Research. (M) Staff.
This course aims to provide students with the knowledge and skills needed to use computational
techniques to facilitate linguistic research. It introduces the computer representation of linguistic data,
the construction of linguistic databases, ways of searching for and extracting information of interest,
and ways of generating useful displays of the results. Topics covered include the representation of text
on computers (multilingual character encoding, mark-up schemes, means of converting among
representations); regular expressions and their use in searching; context free grammars; basic parsing
techniques; properties and uses of databases; approaches to annotation; and sorting as a tool for
searching and organizing data.
549. (CIS 477) Mathematical Techniques in Natural Language Processing. (A) Joshi.
Basic concepts of set theory, relations and functions, properties of relations. Basic concepts of
algebra. Grammars, languages, and automata-finite state grammars, regular expressions, finite state
transducers, context-free grammars and pushdown automata. Context-sensitive grammars- string
context sensitivity and structural context-sensitivity. Mildly context-sensitive grammars.
Turingmachines. Grammars ad deductive systems, parsing as deduction. Stochastic grammars. The
course will deal with these topics in a very basic and introductory manner, i.e., the key ideas of the
proofs and not detailed proofs will be presented. More importantly, throughout the course plenty of
linguistic examples to bring out the linguistic relevance of these topics will be discussed.
545. (COGS501, PSYC501) Mathematical Foundations for Language and Communication
Sciences I. (D) Liberman.
This two-semester sequence will provide basic mathematical modeling and algorithmic tools for
interdisciplinary research in animal, human or machine communication, in association with the IRCS
IGERT program. Topics include signal processing, statistical modeling and machine learning,
information theory, game theory, and formal language theory. The courses will be taught in a
laboratory setting, and will emphasize practical skills as well as basic concepts.
546. (PSYC646) Mathematical Foundations of Language Communication II. (D) Liberman.
This two-semester sequence will provide basic mathematical modeling and algorithmic tools for
interdisciplinary research in animal, human or machine communication, in association with the IRCS
IGERT program. Topics include signal processing, statistical modeling and machine learning,
information theory, game theory, and formal language theory. The courses will be taught in a
laboratory setting, and will emphasize practical skills as well as basic concepts.

Page 9 of 16

LINGUISTICS
(AS) {LING}
SM 548. Proof Theoretic Foundations of Linguistic Structure. (A) Clark.
This course covers the fundamentals of proof theory and logic as they apply to linguistics. The notion
of a well-formed derivation is fundamental to all flavors of formal linguistics and all sub-disciplines of
linguistics-phonology, morphology, syntax and semantics. It rests, ultimately, on axiomatic systems
developed by logicians to encode the process of valid formal reasoning. We will place a particular
emphasis on constructive methods and, where appropriate, develop connections with parsing theory,
automatic theorem proving and computational semantics. Time permitting, we will consider some
introductory topics in substructural logic-systems that encode some proper sub-part of first order logic.
These systems have proven very important in planning, theorem proving, dynamic logic and
computational linguistics. The course is intended as a preparation for Linguistics 553 (Formal
Semantics I). It includes a review of the propositional and predicate calculus before introducing
tableaux and resolution systems, unification, axiomatic systems, natural deduction and sequent
calculi. The latter two systems are particularly relevant for grammar formalisms like phrase structure
grammars, TAGs and Categorial Grammar.
550. Syntax I. (A) Kroch.
A general introduction at the graduate level to the analysis of sentence structure. The approach taken
is that of contemporary generative-transformational grammar.
551. Syntax II. (B) Legate.Prerequisite(s): LING 550 or permission of instructor.
The second half of a year-long introduction to the formal study of natural language syntax. Topics to
be covered include grammatical architecture; derivational versus representational statement of
syntactic principles; movement and locality; the interface of syntax and semantics; argument structure;
and other topics. The emphasis is on reading primary literature and discussing theoretical
approaches, along with detailed case-studies of specific syntactic phenomena in different languages.
SM 556. Historical Syntax. (M) Kroch.Prerequisite(s): LING 551 or the equivalent.
Introduction to the study of the syntax of languages attested only in historical corpora. The course will
cover methods and results in the grammatical description of such languages and in the diachronic
study of syntactic change.
SM 560. The Study of the Speech Community: Field Methods. (C)
For students who plan to carry out research in the speech community. Techniques and theory derived
from sociolinguistic studies will be used to define neighborhoods, enter the community, analyze social
networks, and obtain tape-recorded data from face-to-face interviews. Students will work in groups
and study a single city block.
SM 562. Quantitative Study of Linguistic Variation. (I) Tamminga.Prerequisite(s): LING 560 and
either STAT 500 or STAT 501 (or permission of instructor).
This course provides students with the opportunity to hone their statistical, computational, and
organizational skillsets while conducting original linguistic research on data gathered in continuing
fieldwork in the speech community. Topics include forced alignment and vowel extraction, auditory and
automated variable coding, the application of linear and logistic regression, and techniques for
effective data visualization.
SM 563. Sound Change in Progress. (M) Prerequisite(s): LING 520.
The study of current sound changes in the speech community through instrumental means. Causes of
linguistic diversity and consequences for speech recognition.

Page 10 of 16

LINGUISTICS
(AS) {LING}
580. (LING380) Semantics I. (A) Schwarz.Prerequisite(s): Ling 550. Corequisite(s): Ling 550.
This course provides an introduction to formal semantics for natural language. The main aim is to
develop a semantic system that provides a compositional interpretation of natural language
sentences. We discuss various of the aspects central to meaning composition, including function
application, modification, quantification, and binding, as well as issues in the syntax-semantics
interface. The basic formal tools relevant for semantic analysis, including set theory, propositional
logic, and predicate logic are also introduced.
568. (LING368) Dialect Geography. (M) Tamminga.
This course traces the origins and characteristics of regional dialects. Beginning with a survey of the
traditional dialectology literature beginning in the 19th century, we will discuss the influences of social,
political, and physical geography on language change. We will then move on to examine the
foundations of North American English dialect regions and the large-scale language changes that
underlie their development. Students enrolled in 368 will complete a final project on American English
accents; students enrolled in 568 will write an original research paper on a non-English dialect topic of
their choosing.!
SM 570. Developmental Psycholinguistics. (B) Yang.
The generative literature on language acquisition has produced many accurate and insightful
descriptions of child language, but relatively few explicit accounts of learning that incorporate the role
of individual experience into the knowledge of specific languages. Likewise, the experimental
approach to language development has identified processes that could provide the bridge between
the data and the grammar, but questions remain whether laboratory findings can sufficiently
generalize to the full range of linguistic complexity. This course is an overview of research in language
acquisition with particular focus on the important connection between what children know and how
they come to know it.
575. Mental Lexicon. (M) Yang.
An investigation of the psychological representations and processing of words. Topics include: the
extraction of words from speech; lexical access and production; the induction of morphological and
phonological regularities in word learning; decomposition of morphologically complex words;
frequency effects in morphological processing; storage vs. computation in the lexicon; the past tense
debate; morphological change. This course makes extensive use of linguistic corpora. Students will
also be familiarized with experimental design issues in the psycholinguistic study of the lexicon.
581. Semantics II. (B) Schwarz.Prerequisite(s): Ling 551. Corequisite(s): Ling 551.
The first part of the course expands the system from LING 580 to include intensional contexts. In
particular, we discuss analyses of modals, attitude verbs, and conditionals, as well as the scope of
noun phrases in modal environments. The second part of the course discusses a selection of topics
from current work in semantics, such as the semantics of questions, tense and aspect, donkey
anaphora, indefinites, genericity, degree constructions, events and situations, domain restriction,
plurality and focus.
590. Linguistic Pragmatics I. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): LING 550 or permission of instructor.
This course is the first of a two-term introduction to linguistic pragmatics, the branch of linguistics
whose goal is to provide a formal characterization of discourse competence, i.e. of what people know
when they "know" how to use (a) language. Among the topics investigated are: The Cooperative
Principle, conversational and conventional implicature, speech acts, reference, and presupposition.

Page 11 of 16

LINGUISTICS
(AS) {LING}
SM 591. Linguistic Pragmatics II. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): LING 590.
This course is the second of a two-term introduction to linguistic pragmatics. Among the topics
investigated are: given/new information, definiteness/ indefiniteness, topic/comment, Centering
Theory, discourse structure, and the functions of syntax.
595. Game Theoretic Pragmatics. (M) Clark.
A great deal of linguistic meaning can be explained if we conceive of language as being a signaling
system used by rational agents. Game theory provides an explicit mathematical account of rational,
strategic interaction. This course will lay out the fundamentals of game theory, evolutionary game
theory and multi-agent systems necessary to develop a theory of "radical pragmatics." We will discuss
game theoretic models of implicature; presuppostion and accomodation; reference tracking; scalar
implicature as well as a number of other phenomena.
SM 596. Pragmatics Workshop. (A) Clark.
SM 603. Topics in Phonology. (M) Buckley/Noyer.Prerequisite(s): LING 530-531.
Topics are chosen from such areas as featural representations; syllable theory; metrical structure;
tonal phonology; prosodic morphology; interaction of phonology with syntax and morphology.
SM 604. Topics in Discourse Analysis. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): LING 550 and LING 590 or
permission of instructor.
Selected topics in discourse and pragmatics, e.g. reference, presupposition, functions of syntax.
SM 608. Topics in Semantics and Pragmatics. (M) Clark/Schwarz.
SM 610. (GRMN602) Seminar in Historical and Comparative Linguistics. (C) Ringe.
Selected topics either in Indo-European comparative linguistics or in historical and comparative
method.
SM 615. Comparative Indo-European Grammar. (E) Ringe.
A survey of phonology and grammar of major ancient Indo-European languages and the
reconstruction of Proto-Indo-European. A knowledge of at least one ancient Indo-European language
is required.
SM 640. Formal Semantics and Mathematical Linguistics. (B) Clark.
Advanced readings in formal semantics and discrete and continuous models of linguistic behavior.
SM 616. Comparative Indo-Europian Grammar II. (C) Ringe.
A survey of phonology and grammar of major ancient Indo-European languages and the
reconstruction of Proto-Indo-European. A knowledge of at least one ancient Indo-European language
is required.
SM 620. Topics in Phonetics. (M) Liberman/Kuang.

Page 12 of 16

LINGUISTICS
(AS) {LING}
SM 630. Seminar in Morphology. (M) Noyer/Embick.Prerequisite(s): LING 530.
Readings in modern morphological theory and evaluation of hypotheses in the light of synchronic and
diachronic evidence from various languages.
SM 650. Topics in Natural-Language Syntax. (C) Kroch/Legate.Prerequisite(s): LING 551 or
permission of instructor.
Detailed study of topics in syntax and semantics, e.g., pronominalization, negation, complementation.
Topics vary from term to term.
SM 653. Topics in the Syntax-Semantics Interface. (A) Kroch.
Topics in the Syntax-Semantics Interface
SM 656. Seminar in Historical Syntax. (M) Kroch.
This course analyzes several well documented syntactic changes in the European languages with the
tools of modern grammatical and quantitative analysis. The focus is on the competition between forms
and systems as in the loss of the verb-second constraint in English and French and the competition
between head initial and head final word orders in the several West Germanic languages.
SM 660. Research Seminar in Sociolinguistics. (M) This course will have different topics each
term.
Students approaching the dissertation level will explore with faculty frontier areas of research on
linguistic change and variation. Topics addressed in recent years include: experimental investigation of
the reliability of syntactic judgments; the development of TMA systems in creoles; transmission of
linguistic change across generations. The course may be audited by those who have finished their
course work or taken for credit in more than one year.
SM 662. Topics in Experimental Sociolinguistics.
SM 670. Topics in the Cultural Evolution of Language. Roberts.
Readings in the cultural evolution of language. This encompasses research on the contribution of
processes of cultural change to the emergence of language in the human species, the emergence of
new languages, and language change viewed as a cultural-evolutionary process. There will be an
emphasis on research employing empirical methods, particularly experimentation. Otherwise focus
varies from term to term.
999. Independent Study and Research. (C) Student must submit brief proposal for approval. May be
repeated for credit.

Language Courses
071. American Sign Language I. (C) Staff. Offered through the Penn Language Center
Introduction to learning and understanding American Sign Language ( ASL ); cultural values and rules
of behavior of the Deaf community in the United States. Includes receptive and expressive readiness
activities; sign vocabulary; grammatical structure; facial expressive, body movement, gestures signs;
receptive and expressive fingerspelling; and deaf culture.

Page 13 of 16

LINGUISTICS
(AS) {LING}
072. American Sign Language II. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): LING 071 or Permission of the Instructor.
Offered through the Penn Language Center
Increased communication skill in American Sign Language ( ASL ); cultural values and behavioral
rules of the deaf community in the U.S.; receptive and expressive activities; sign vocabulary;
grammatical structure; receptive and expressive fingerspelling and aspects of Deaf culture.
073. American Sign Language III. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): LING 072 or permission of instructor.
Offered through the Penn Language Center
Expanded instruction of American Sign Language (ASL). Receptive and expressive activities; sign
vocabulary; grammatical structure; receptive and expressive fingerspelling; narrative skills, cultural
bahviors; and aspects of Deaf culture. Abstract and conversational approach.
074. American Sign Language IV. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): LING 073 or permission of instructor.
Offered through the Penn Language Center
Increases the emphasis on more abstract and challenging conversational and narrative range.
Includes receptive and expressive readiness activities; sign vocabulary; grammatical structure;
receptive and expressive fingerspelling; various aspects of Deaf culture and cultural behavior rules.
075. American Sign Language V. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): LING 074 or permission of instructor.
Offered through the Penn Language Center
This is an advanced ASL course in which students expand their conversational and narrative range.
While receptive readiness activities continue to be an important part of the class, the emphasis moves
toward honing expressive sign skills through narrative presentation and ASL-only class discussions.
Various aspects of Deaf culture and cultural behavior rules will be incorporated into the course. A
large component of the course is a unit on Deaf history in which students read and discuss major
events and famous deaf people via readings, film, class lectures and discussions, and other outside
resources.
SM 076. Deaf Literature, Performance, Art, and Film. (B) Draganac-Hawk.Prerequisite(s): Ling 074
and prior language experience or permission from instructor.
This course is an advanced/conversational ASL course that explores several key topics related to
Deaf culture and the Deaf experience s influence on literature (both written and signed), theatre, fine
and visual arts, and film -both Deaf and hearing directed and acted. Using only ASL in class, students
learn about various perspectives and approaches to each of the themes and topics of the course.
Some questions to explore and answer in this course will be: What is Deaf Literature? The Deaf Lens:
What is it? How is it different from a hearing perspective on film? How is Deafness expressed
differently in each of the arts discussed in this course? Analysis and discussion will come from
readings as well as viewings of various types of Deaf arts.

Page 14 of 16

LINGUISTICS
(AS) {LING}
077. ASL/Deaf Studies - ABCS. Fisher.Prerequisite(s): Ling 078 and permission from instructor.
For this course, students will attend Pennsylvania School for the Deaf on a weekly basis where they
will participate in and contribute to the school community via tutoring or other mutually agreeable
activities. Students will also have formal class on a weekly basis with discussions and activities
centering on reflection of community experiences through linguistic as well as cultural lenses.
Additionally, drawing from the required Linguistics and other ASL/Deaf Studies coursework, students
will develop an inquiry question and conduct preliminary community-based research to analyze
sociolinguistic variations of ASL and Deaf cultural attitudes, behaviors, and norms. Ongoing reflections
and discussions-formal and informal-on Deaf cultural/theoretical topics drawing from readings as well
as community experiences will be integral to the course experience. LING 078, Topics in Deaf Culture
and permission from the instructor, are required for this course.
SM 078. Deaf Culture. (C) Fisher.Prerequisite(s): LING 074 or permission from coordinator. Offered
through Penn Language Center
This course is an advanced/conversational ASL course that explores several key topics related to
Deaf Culture. Using only ASL in class, students will read and discuss books, articles, and films related
to the following topics: What is Deaf Culture?, The History of the Deaf American, Communication
Issues and Pathological Perspectives on Deafness, Deafness and Education, Deaf/Hearing Family
Dynamics, and Deaf Theatre, Arts, and Poetry. Vocabulary, grammar, and idioms related to the topics
will be presented through direct instruction as well as through the course of class conversation.
081. Beginning Irish Gaelic I. (D) Blyn-LaDrew. Offered through the Penn Language Center
Irish Gaelic, spoken primarily on the west coast of Ireland, is rich in oral traditions, song, poetry and
literature. Knowledge of this language provides a foundation to understanding Celtic folklore and
linguistics and also enhances the study of Anglo-Irish literature and history. The first-year course will
include reading, conversation, listening and speaking.
082. Beginning Irish Gaelic II. (C) Blyn-LaDrew.Prerequisite(s): LING 081 or permission from
instructor. Offered through Penn Language Center
083. Intermediate Irish Gaelic I. (C) Blyn-LaDrew.Prerequisite(s): LING 082 or equivalent. Offered
through the Penn Language Center
085. Advanced Irish Gaelic I. (C) Blyn-LaDrew.Prerequisite(s): LING 084 or equivalent. Offered
through Penn Language Center
086. Advanced Irish Gaelic II. (C) Blyn-LaDrew.Prerequisite(s): LING 085 or equivalent. Offered
through the Penn Language Center
This course will emphasize reading of literary texts, and advanced aspects of grammar, composition,
and conversation.

Page 15 of 16

LINGUISTICS
(AS) {LING}
088. History of the Irish Language. (L) Blyn-LaDrew. Offered through the Penn Language Center
From downloadable lists of computer terminology in Irish to Ogam inscriptions chiseled in stone in the
5th century, the history of the Irish language reflects the history of the people themselves. This course
outlines the language's changes through time and emergence from the unwritten Celtic, proto-Celtic,
and Indo-European speech of its ancestors. Beginning in the modern period, when the very status of
Irish as a living language has been hotly debated, the course will look backwards at the Celtic cultural
revival of the late 19th century, the impact of the famine, nationalism, colonialism, the arrival of
Christianity and the Roman alphabet, and the position of Irish within the Celtic branch of the IndoEuropean language family. Term papers may be based on fieldwork in the Irish-American community,
or research. Audio and visual resources will supplement the lectures. Knowledge of Irish Gaelic is not
required.
091. American Sign Language III/IV. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): LING072 or by permission of
instructor. Corequisite(s): Expanded instruction of ASL. Offered by Penn Language Center; permit
from Penn Language Center required for admission.
Expanded instruction of American Sign LAnguage (ASL). Includes receptive and expressive readiness
activities; sign vocabulary; grammatical structure; receptive and finger-spelling; narrative skills; cultural
behaviors; and aspects of Deaf culture. Increases the emphasis on more abstract and challenging
conversational and narrative range. Abstract and conversational approach.

Page 16 of 16

