MECHANICAL ENGINEERING AND APPLIED MECHANICS
(EG) {MEAM}
091. Shop Tr: Manual Milling. (C)
Fundamental principles of manual milling of metals, including hands-on training in the machine shop.
092. Shop Tr: Manual Turning. (C)
Fundamental principles of manual turning of metals using a lathe, including hands-on training in the
machine shop.
093. Shop Tr: Hybrid Milling.
Building upon the basics covered in 091, this intermediate-level course includes detailed operation
sequencing, fixture design, and hands-on conversational CNC programming for the ProtoTrak Hybrid
Mill.
094. Tr: CNC Milling/solidcam. (C)
Building upon proficiency in 091 and 093, this hands-on course covers the details of full computercontrolled machining using SolidCAM and the Haas MiniMill.
095. Shop Tr: CNC Turning. (C)
Building upon the basics of 092, this course explores advanced computer-controlled turning using
SolidCAM and the Haas TL-1.
099. Independent Study. (C) Open to all students. A maximum of 2 c.u. of MEAM 099 may be
applied toward the B.A.S. or B.S.E. degree requirements
An opportunity for the student to become closely associated with a professor in (1) a research effort to
develop research skills and technique and/or (2) to develop a program of independent in-depth study
in a subject area in which the professor and student have a common interest. The challenge of the
task undertaken must be consistent with the student's academic level. To register for this course, the
student and professor jointly submit a detailed proposal. Subject to the approval of the MEAM
Undergraduate Curriculum Chair.
101. Introduction to Mechanical Design. (C) This course is available to all Engineering majors.
This hands-on, project-based course covers the fundamentals of the modern mechanical design
process, from needfinding and brainstorming to the basics of computerized manufacturing and rapid
prototyping. Topics include: product definition (needfinding, observation, sketching, and brainstorming);
computer-aided design (part creation, assemblies, and animation using SolidWorks); fundamental
engineering design practices (material selection, dimensioning, tolerances, etc.); basic computer
simulation and analysis; and rapid prototyping (laser cutter, 3-D fused-deposition modeling, and an
introduction to computer-controlled machining).

Page 1 of 16

MECHANICAL ENGINEERING AND APPLIED MECHANICS
(EG) {MEAM}
L/R 110. Introduction to Mechanics. (A) Corequisite(s): MATH 104 (The Engineering section of this
class is strongly recommended) and MEAM 147.
This lecture course and a companion laboratory course (MEAM 147) build upon the concepts of
Newtonian (classical) mechanics and their application to engineered systems. This course introduces
students to mechanical principles that are the foundation of upper-level engineering courses including
MEAM 210 and 211. The three major parts of this course are: I. Vector Mechanics; II. Statics and
Structures; and III. Kinematics and Dynamics. Topics include: vector analysis, statics of rigid bodies,
introduction to deformable bodies, friction, kinematics of motion, work and energy, and dynamics of
particles. Case studies will be introduced, and the role of Newtonian mechanics in emerging
applications including bio- and nano- technologies will be discussed.
147. Introduction to Mechanics Lab. (A) Corequisite(s): MEAM 110.
This half-credit laboratory class is a companion to the Introduction to Mechanics lecture course
(MEAM 110). It investigates the concepts of Newtonian (classical) mechanics through weekly handson experiments, emphasizing connections between theoretical principles and practical applications in
engineering. In addition to furthering their understanding about the workings of the physical world,
students will improve their skills at conducting experiments, obtaining reliable data, presenting
numerical results, and extracting meaningful information from such numbers.
201. Machine Design and Manufacturing. (B) Prerequisite(s): MEAM 101; MEAM 210 or equivalent
as co/pre-requisite (or permission of the instructor).
Building upon the fundamentals of mechanical design taught in MEAM 101, this hands-on, projectbased course provides students with the knowledge and skills necessary to design, analyze,
manufacture. and test fully-functional mechanical systems. Topics covered include an introduction to
machine elements, analysis of the mechanics of machining, manufacturing technology, precision
fabrication (milling, turning, and computer-controlled machining), metrology, tolerances, cutting-tool
fundamentals and engineering materials. Enrollment is limited.
L/R 203. Thermodynamics I. (B) Prerequisite(s): Math 104 and Math 114.
Thermodynamics is the study of the fundamental concepts underlying the conversion of energy in
such mechanical systems as internal and external combustion engines (including automobile and
aircraft engines), compressors, pumps, refrigerators, and turbines. This course is intended for students
in mechanical engineering, chemical engineering, materials science, physics and other fields. The
topics include: Basic definitions, microscopic and macroscopic points of view; properties of pure
substances and reversibility and irreversibility, the thermodynamic temperature scale, entropy,
availability, second law analysis, power and refrigeration cycles and their engineering applications.
L/R 210. Statics and Strength of Materials. (A) Prerequisite(s): MEAM 110/147 or Physics 150.
Corequisite(s): Math 240 and MEAM 247 are strongly recommended.
This course is primarily intended for students in mechanical engineering, but may also be of interest to
students in materials science and other fields. It continues the treatment of statics of rigid bodies
begun in MEAM 110/PHYS 150 and progresses to the treatment of deformable bodies and their
response to loads. The concepts of stress, strain, and linearly elastic response are introduced and
applied to the behavior of rods, shafts, beams and other mechanical components. The failure and
design of mechanical components are discussed.

Page 2 of 16

MECHANICAL ENGINEERING AND APPLIED MECHANICS
(EG) {MEAM}
L/R 211. Engineering Mechanics: Dynamics. (B) Prerequisite(s): MEAM 210. Corequisite(s): MATH
241 or ENM 251 and ENGR 105 or equivalent.
This course introduces the basic concepts in kinematics and dynamics that are necessary to
understand, analyze and design mechanisms and machines. These concepts are also fundamental to
the modeling and analysis of human movement, biomechanics, animation of synthetic human models
and robotics. The topics covered include: Particle dynamics using energy and momentum methods of
analysis; Dynamics of systems of particles; Impact; Systems of variable mass; Kinematics and
dynamics of rigid bodies in plane motion; Computer-aided dynamic simulation and animation.
L/R 302. Fluid Mechanics. (A) Prerequisite(s): MATH 241 or ENM 251 and PHYS 150 or MEAM
110/147.
Physical properties; fluid statics; Bernoulli equation; fluid kinematics; conservation laws and finite
control-volume analysis; conservation laws and differential analysis; inviscid flow; The Navier-Stokes
equation and some exact solutions; similitude, dimensional analysis, and modeling; flow in pipes and
channels; boundary layer theory; lift and drag.
245. Introduction to Flight. (A) Prerequisite(s): PHYS 150 or MEAM 110/147. Corequisite(s): MATH
240.
Basic concepts: pressure, density, velocity, forces. The standard atmosphere. Introduction to low speed
aerodynamics. Airfoils, wings, and other aerodynamic shapes. Aircraft performance. Aircraft stability
and control. Aircraft propulsion.
247. Mechanical Engineering Laboratory I. (A) Prerequisite(s): Sophomore standing in engineering.
Corequisite(s): MEAM 210 strongly recommended.
This is the first of a two semester sophomore level laboratory sequence that students complete over
the fall and spring semesters. The course teaches the principles of experimentation and measurement
as well as analysis and application to design. This fall semester course follows closely with MEAM
210, involving experiments to explore the principles of statics and strength of materials.
248. Mechanical Engineering Lab I. (B) Prerequisite(s): Sophomore standing in engineering.
Corequisite(s): MEAM 203 and MEAM 211 are strongly recommended.
This is the second of a two-semester sophomore level laboratory sequence that students complete
over the fall and spring semesters. The course teaches the principles of experimentation and
measurement as well as analysis and application to design. The spring semester course follows
closely with MEAM 203 and MEAM 211, expanding upon the principles of experimentation,
measurement, analysis, and design of systems through hands-on laboratories and projects in
thermodynamics and dynamics.
L/R 321. Vibrations of Mechanical Systems. (B) Prerequisite(s): MATH 241 or ENM 251 and MEAM
211.
This course teaches the fundamental concepts underlying the dynamics of vibrations for single-degree
of freedom, multi-degree and infinite-degree of freedom mechanical systems. The course will focus on
Newton's Force Methods, Virtual-Work Methods, and Lagrange's Variation Methods for analyzing
problems in vibrations. Students will learn how to analyze transient, steady state and forced motion of
single and multi-degree of freedom linear and non-linear systems. The course teaches analytical
solution techniques for linear systems and practical numerical and simulation methods for analysis and
design of nonlinear systems.

Page 3 of 16

MECHANICAL ENGINEERING AND APPLIED MECHANICS
(EG) {MEAM}
L/R 333. Heat and Mass Transfer. (B) Prerequisite(s): MEAM 203 and MEAM 302.
This course covers fundamentals of heat and mass transfer and applications to practical problems in
energy conversion and conservation. Emphasis will be on developing a physical and analytical
understanding of conductive, convective, and radiative heat transfer, as well as design of heat
exchangers and heat transfer with phase change. Topics covered will include: types of heat transfer
processes, their relative importance, and the interactions between them, solutions of steady state and
transient state conduction, emission and absorption of radiation by real surfaces and radiative transfer
between surfaces, heat transfer by forced and natural convection owing to flow around bodies and
through ducts, analytical solutions for some sample cases and applications of correlations for
engineering problems. Students will develop an ability to apply governing principles and physical
intuition to solve problems.
347. Mechanical Engineering Design Laboratory. (A) Prerequisite(s): Junior standing in
engineering.
This is a junior level laboratory course. The course teaches the principles of design and measurement
systems including basic electromechanical systems. It follows MEAM 302 and MEAM 321 including
experiments in fluid mechanics, and vibration in the design of mechanical systems.
348. Mechanical Engineering Design Laboratory. (B) Prerequisite(s): Junior standing in
engineering.
This course is a junior lab which follows MEAM 333 Heat Transfer and MEAM 354 Mechanics of
Materials with design projects based on those topics. In the broader context of design/independent
skill development, this course also introduces open ended topics, wider design options, and introduces
project planning and management.
L/R 354. Mechanics of Solids. (A) Prerequisite(s): MEAM 210 or equivalent, BE200 or permission of
instructor.
This course builds on the fundamentals of solid mechanics taught in MEAM 210 and addresses more
advanced problems in strength of materials. The students will be exposed to a wide array of
applications from traditional engineering disciplines as well as emerging areas such as biotechnology
and nanotechnology. The methods of analysis developed in this course will form the cornerstone of
machine design and also more advanced topics in the mechanics of materials.
404. Materials in Mechanical Design. (C)
This course covers materials concepts that are essential in mechanical design. The properties,
selection, and processing of a wide range of materials (including metals, ceramics, polymers,
composites) are examined from both a fundamental and practical perspective. The relationship of
material properties to bonding and microstructure of materials are discussed. An emphasis is placed
on mechanical properties of materials, including modulus, strength, fracture, fatigue, wear, and creep.
Design-based case studies are used to illustrate the selection of materials and processes.
405. (MEAM505, MSE 405, MSE 505) Mechanical Properties of Macro/Nanoscale Materials. (A)
The application of continuum and microstructural concepts to consideration of the mechanics and
mechanisms of flow and fracture in metals, polymers and ceramics. The course includes a review of
tensors and elasticity with special emphasis on the effects of symmetry on tensor properties. Then
deformation, fracture and degradation (fatique and wear) are treated, including mapping strategies for
understanding the ranges of material properties.

Page 4 of 16

MECHANICAL ENGINEERING AND APPLIED MECHANICS
(EG) {MEAM}
446. Mechanical Engineering Design Projects. (B)
This is the second course in the two course sequence involving the capstone design project. See
MEAM 445 for course description.
410. (MEAM510) Design of Mechatronic Systems. (A) Prerequisite(s): Junior or Senior standing in
MEAM and a first course in Programming.
In many modern systems, mechanical elements are tightly coupled with electronic components and
embedded computers. Mechatronics is the study of how these domains are interconnected, and this
hands-on, project-based course provides an integrated introduction to the fundamental components
within each of the three domains, including: mechanical elements (prototyping, materials, actuators
and sensors, transmissions, and fundamental kinematics), electronics(basic circuits, filters, op amps,
discrete logic, and interfacing with mechanical elements), and computing (interfacing with the analog
world, microprocessor technology, basic control theory, and programming).
415. (IPD 515, OIDD415) Product Design. (C)
This course provides tools and methods for creating new products. The course is intended for students
with a strong career interest in new product development, entrepreneurship, and/or technology
development. The course follows an overall product design methodology, including the identification of
customer needs, generation of product concepts, prototyping, and design-for-manufacturing. Weekly
student assignments are focused on the design of a new product and culminate in the creation of a
prototype. The course is open to juniors and seniors in SEAS or Wharton.
445. Mechanical Engineering Design Projects. (A) Prerequisite(s): Junior standing.
This capstone design project course is required of all mechanical engineering students. Student teams
will design and test complex mechanical systems that address a societal or consumer need. Projects
are devised by the team, sponsored by industry, or formulated by Penn professors. Each project is
approved by the instructor and a faculty advisor. Topics treated in the course include project planning,
prototyping, patent and library searches, intellectual property, ethics, and technical writing and
presentations. The work is spread over MEAM 445 and MEAM 446.
454. (MEAM554) Mechanics of Materials. (M) Prerequisite(s): MEAM 210 and/or MEAM 354, MATH
240, 241 or ENM 251.
This course is an upper level course that discusses the behavior of materials, the selection of
materials in mechanical components, and the mechanics of deformable bodies. It is intended for
students interested in material science, mechanical engineering, and civil engineering. The topics
covered include: Stress. Strain. Principal Stresses. Compatibility. Elastic stress-strain relations. Strain
energy. Plane strain. Plane stress. Rods and trusses. Bending of beams. Torsion. Rotating disks.
Castigliano's Theorem. Dummy loads. Principle of virtual work. The Rayleigh-Ritz Methods.
Introduction to the finite element method. Non-linear material behavior. Yielding. Failure.
455. (BE 455, MEAM544) Continuum Biomechanics. (A)
Continuum mechanics with applications to biological systems. Fundamental engineering conservation
laws are introduced and illustrated using biological and non-biological examples. Kinematics of
deformation, stress, and conservation of mass, momentum, and energy. Constitutive equations for
fluids, solids, and intermediate types of media are described and applied to selected biological
examples. Class work is complemented by computational laboratory experiences.

Page 5 of 16

MECHANICAL ENGINEERING AND APPLIED MECHANICS
(EG) {MEAM}
502. Energy Engineering. (A) Prerequisite(s): MEAM 203 or equivalent, and MEAM 333 or equivalent
(Heat Transfer, that could be taken concurrently with MEAM 402).
Quantitative introduction to the broad area of energy engineering, from basic principles to applications.
The focus is on the science and engineering of power generation. The course includes a review of
energy resources and consumption, power cycles, combined cycles, and co-generation, nuclear
energy and wastes, solar thermal and photovoltaic energy, and wind power. Additional energy
conversion topics including energy storage and geothermal, thermoelectric, hydroelectric and biomass
power will be briefly discussed.
503. Direct Energy Conversion: from Macro to Nano. (C) Prerequisite(s): Basics of thermodynamics
(MEAM 203 or equivalent), Basics of heat transfer (MEAM 333 or equivalent).
The course focuses on devices that convert thermal, solar, or chemical energy directly to electricity,
i.e., without intermediate mechanical machinery such as a turbine. A variety of converters with sizes
ranging from macro to nano scale will be discussed. Topics will include thermoelectric energy
converters and radioisotope thermoelectric generator (RTGs), thermionic energy converters (TEC),
photovoltaic (PV) and thermophotovoltaic (TPV) cells, as well as piezoelectric harvesters. Additional
topics may include magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) generators, alkali metal thermal-to-electric
converters (AMTEC), and fuel cells.
504. Tribology. (C) Prerequisite(s): Senior standing in Mechanical Engineering or Materials Science or
by permission of the instructor.
The course will compreshensively cover both theorectical and practical tribology, the science and
technology of interacting surfaces in relative motion. The various modes of lubrication, hydrodynamic,
elastohydradynamic, hydrostatic, mixed, solid and dry, will be studied in detail. The contact between
solid surfaces will be covered, leading to an understanding of friction and various modes of wear. At
each stage, it will be shown how the tribological principles learned can be applied in practice to
improve the efficiency and durability of mechanical equipment and thereby enhance sustainability
through energy and materials conservation.
513. (ESE 505) Feedback Control Design and Analysis. (B) Prerequisite(s): MEAM 321 or ESE
210, Juniors and Seniors encouraged to enroll.
Basic methods for analysis and design of feedback control in systems. Applications to practical
systems. Methods presented include time response analysis, frequency response analysis, root locus,
Nyquist and Bode plots, and the state-space approach.
505. (MEAM405, MSE 405) Mechanical Properties of Macro/Nanoscale Materials. (A)
The application of continuum and microstructural concepts to consideration of the mechanics and
mechanisms of flow and fracture in metals, polymers and ceramics. The course includes a review of
tensors and elasticity with special emphasis on the effects of symmetry on tensor properties. Then
deformation, fracture and degradation (fatique and wear) are treated, including mapping strategies for
understanding the ranges of material properties.
507. (MSE 507) Fundamentals of Materials. (C)
This course will provide a graduate level introduction to the science and engineering of materials. It is
designed specifically to meet the needs of students who will be doing research that involves materials
but who do not have an extensive background in the field. The focus is on fundamental aspects of
materials science and will emphasize phenomena and how to describe them . The course assumes an
undergraduate background in any area of physical/chemical science and undergraduate mathematics
appropriate to this. The course will also be accessible to students of applied mathematics.

Page 6 of 16

MECHANICAL ENGINEERING AND APPLIED MECHANICS
(EG) {MEAM}
510. (MEAM410) Design of Mechatronic Systems. (A) Prerequisite(s): Graduate standing in
engineering or permission of the instructor.
In many modern systems, mechanical elements are tightly coupled with electronic components and
embedded computers. Mechatronics is the study of how these domains are interconnected, and this
hands-on, project-based course provides an integrated introduction to the fundamental components
within each of the three domains, including: mechanical elements (prototyping, materials, actuators
and sensors, transmissions, and fundamental kinematics), electronics(basic circuits, filters, op amps,
discrete logic, and interfacing with mechanielements), and computing (interfacing with the analog
world, microprocessor technology, basic control theory, and programming).
514. (IPD 514) Design for Manufacturability. (B) Prerequisite(s): MEAM 101 or equivalent, MEAM
210 or equivalent, senior or graduate standing in the School of Design, Engineering, or Business with
completed product development and/or design engineering core coursework or related experience.
This course is aimed at providing current and future product design/development engineers,
manufacturing engineers, and product development managers with an applied understanding of
Design for Manufacturability (DFM) concepts and methods. The course content includes materials
from multiple disciplines including: engineering design, manufacturing, marketing, finance, project
management, and quality systems.
516. (IPD 516) Advanced Mechatronic Reactive Spaces.. (B)
This course combines performance art and advanced mechatronics concepts that include the design
and implementation of large-scale actuation, advanced sensing, actuation and control. This course
pairs design school and engineering students to form interdisciplinary teams that together design and
build electro-mechanical reactive spaces and scenic/architectural elements in the context of the
performing arts. The two disciplinary groups will be treated separately and receive credit for different
courses (ARCH746 will be taught concurrently and in some cases co-located) as they will be learning
different things. Engineering students gain design sensibilities and advanced mechatronics in the form
of networked embedded processing and protocols for large scale actuation and sensing. Design
students learn elementary mechatronics and design reactive architectures and work with engineering
students to build them. The class will culminate in a some artistic performance (typically with
professional artists) such as a Shakespeare play, robotic ballet, a mechatronic opera.
519. (MSE 550) Elasticity and Micromechanics of Materials. (C)
This course is targeted to engineering students working in the areas on micro/nanomechanics of
materials. The course will start with a quick review of the equations of linear elasticity and proceed to
solutions of specific problems such as the Hertz contact problem, Eshelby's problem etc. Failure
mechanisms such as fracture and the fundamentals of dislocations/plasticity will also be discussed.
520. Introduction to Robotics. (A) Prerequisite(s): MEAM 211 and MATH 240 or equivalent.
The rapidly evolving field of robotics includes systems designed to replace, assist, or even entertain
humans in a wide variety of tasks. Recent examples include human-friendly robot arms for
manufacturing, interactive robotic pets, medical and surgical assistive robots, and semi-autonomous
search-and-rescue vehicles. This course presents the fundamental kinematic, dynamic, and
computational principles underlying most modern robotic systems. The main topics of the course
include: rotation matrices, homogeneous transformations, manipulator forward kinematics, manipulator
inverse kinematics, jacobians, path and trajectory planning, sensing and actuation, feedback control,
haptic interfaces, and teleoperation. The material is reinforced with hands-on lab exercises involving a
robotic arm and a haptic interface.

Page 7 of 16

MECHANICAL ENGINEERING AND APPLIED MECHANICS
(EG) {MEAM}
521. Introduction to Parallel Computing. (M) Prerequisite(s): Programming. Familiarity with Linux or
Unix will help.
From numerical weather prediction and earthquake simulations, to quantum mechanics, and to
genome sequencing and molecular dynamics, high-performance computing (HPC) is a fundamental
tool for science. The basic principles on how to design, implement, and evaluate HPC techniques will
be covered. Topics include parallel non-numerical and numerical algorithms, computing platforms, and
message passing interface. Science applications will sample techniques applied to partial differential
equations, many-body problems, and statistical physics. Practical problem-solving and hands-on
examples will be a basic part of the course.
529. (ESE 529) Introduction to MEMS and NEMS. (A)
Introduction to RM MEMS technologies; need for RF MEMS components in wireless communications.
Review of micromachining techniques and MEMS fabrication approaches. Actuation methods in
MEMS, TRF MEMS design and modeling. Examples of RF MEMS components from industry and
academia. Case studies: micro-switches, tunable capacitors, inductors, resonators, filters, oscillators
and micromachined antennas. Overview of RF NEMS.
522. Fundamentals of Sensor Technology. (M)
Explores the principles of sensor science, develops the relationship between intensive and extensive
variables, and presents the linear laws between these variables. Students will review the flux-force
relations describing kinetic phenomena against the context of means for transducing temperature,
stress, strain, magnetic processes and chemical concentration into electrical signals. The need for
multivariate signal processing will be introduced and selected applied topics considered.
L/R 527. (ENM 427) Finite Element Analysis. (A) Prerequisite(s): MATH 241 or ENM 251 and PHYS
151.
The objective of this course is to equip students with the background needed to carry out finite
elements-based simulations of various engineering problems. The first part of the course will outline
the theory of finite elements. The second part of the course will address the solution of classical
equations of mathematical physics such as Laplace, Poisson, Helmholtz, the wave and the Heat
equations. The third part of the course will consist of case studies taken from various areas of
engineering and the sciences on topics that require or can benefit from finite element modeling. The
students will gain hand-on experience with the multi-physics, finite element package FemLab.
528. Advanced Kinematics. (M) Prerequisite(s): Multivariate calculus, introductory abstract algebra,
mathematical maturity.
Differential geometry, Lie groups and rigid body kinematics, Lie algebra, quaternions and dual number
algebra, geometry of curves and ruled surfaces, trajectory generation and motion planning,
applications to robotics and spatial mechanisms.
530. Continuum Mechanics. (A) Prerequisite(s): Multivariable Calculus, Linear Algebra, Partial
Differential Equations.
This course serves as a basic introduction to the Mechanics of continuous media, and it will prepare
the student for more advanced courses in solid and fluid mechanics. The topics to be covered include:
Tensor algebra and calculus, Lagrangian and Eulerian kinematics, Cauchy and Piola-Kirchhoff
stresses, General principles: conservation of mass, conservation of linear and angular momentum,
energy and the first law of thermodynamics, entropy and the second law of thermodynamics;
constitutive theory, ideal fluids, Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluids, finite elasticity, linear elasticity,
materials with microstructure.

Page 8 of 16

MECHANICAL ENGINEERING AND APPLIED MECHANICS
(EG) {MEAM}
535. Advanced Dynamics. (A)
Three-Dimensional Geometry: Introduction to Reference Frames, Geometry of Rotations of Reference
Frames and of Vectors, Euler Angle, Axis-Angle Representations, Properties of Rotation Matrices.
Kinematics: Kinematics of Rigid-Body Motion, Rotations, Angular Velocity and Acceleration, Linear
Velocity and Acceleration, Applications to Planar Linkage Analysis. Constraints: Configuration Space,
Holonomic and Non-holonomic Constraints, Degrees of Freedom, Tests for Holonomic versus Nonholonomic Constraints, Generalized Coordinates, Generalized Speeds, Partial Speeds, Partial
Velocities, Principle of Virtual Work for Holonomic and Non-holonomic systems. Constraint Forces:
Virtual Work, D'Alembert Equations, Lagrange's Equations for Non-holonomic systems. Distribution of
Mass: Center-of-Mass, Vector and Scalar Moments of Inertia. Vector Spaces: Operators, Dyads,
Dyadic, Moment-of-Inertia Tensor, Rigid Bodies. Dynamics: Kinetic Energy and Angular Momentum,
Lagrangian/Hamiltonian Mechanics and Conservation Laws, Poisson Brackets and Constants of the
Motion, Kane-Lagrange Equations with Non-Holonomic Constraints, Kane-Lagrange Equations, Null
Spaces and Computing Constraint Forces. Variational Calculus: The Principle of Least Action, A Study
of Small Perturbations and Linear Stability Analysis.
536. Viscous Fluid Flow and Modern Applications. (M) This course is intended for juniors, seniors
and graduate students from the Schools of Engineering and/or Arts and Sciences that have a general
interest in fluid dynamics and its modern applications. Students should have an understanding of basic
concepts in fluid mechanics and a good grasp on differential equations.
This is an intermediate course that builds on the basic principles of Fluid Mechanics. The course
provides a more in depth and unified framework to understand fluid flow at different time and length
scales, in particular fiscous flows. Topics include review of basic concepts, conservation laws
(momentum, mass, and heat), fluid kinematics, tensor analysis, Stokes' approximations, nonNewtonian fluid mechanics, and tubulence. The course will explore important modern topics such as
microfluidics, swimming of micro-organisms, wind turbines, rheology, biofluid mechanics, and
boundary layers.
537. (MSE 537) Nanotribology. (B) Prerequisite(s): Freshman physics; MEAM 354 or equivalent, or
consent of instructor.
Engineering is progressing to ever smaller scales, enabling new technologies, materials, devices, and
applications. This course will provide an introduction to nano-scale tribology and the critical role it
plays in the developing areas of nanoscience and nanotechnology. We will discuss how contact,
adhesion, friction, lubrication, and wear at interfaces originate, using an integrated approach that
combines concepts of mechanics, materials science, chemistry, and physics. We will cover a range of
concepts and applications, drawing connections to both established and new approaches. We will
discuss the limits of continuum mechanics and present newly developed theories and experiments
tailored to describe micro- and nano-scale phenomena. We will emphasize specific applications
throughout the course. Reading of scientific literature, critical peer discussion, individual and team
problem assignments, and a peer-reviewed literature research project will be assigned as part of the
course.
545. Aerodynamics. (B) Prerequisite(s): MEAM 302.
Review of fluid kinematics and conservation laws; vorticity theorems; two-dimensional potential flow;
airfoil theory; finite wings; oblique shocks; supersonic wing theory; laminar and turbulent boundary
layers.

Page 9 of 16

MECHANICAL ENGINEERING AND APPLIED MECHANICS
(EG) {MEAM}
540. Optimal Design of Mechanical Systems. (M) Prerequisite(s): MATH 240, 312 or equivalent;
MEAM 210, 453 or equivalent, or permission of the instructor; familiarity with a computer language;
undergraduates require permission.
Mathematical modeling of mechanical design problems for optimization. Highlights and overview of
optimization methods: unconstrained optimization, unidirectional search techniques, gradient,
conjugate direction, and Newton methods. Constrained optimization. KKT optimality conditions,
penalty formulations, augmented Lagrangians, and others. SLP and SQP and other approximate
techniques for solving practical design problems. Monotonicity analysis and modeling of optimal
design problems. Optimization of structural elements including shape and topology synthesis.
Variational formulation of distributed and discrete parameter structures. Design criteria for stiffness
and strength. Design sensitivity analysis. The course will include computer programs to implement the
algorithms discussed and solve realistic design problems. A term project is required.
543. Performance and Design of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs). (C) Prerequisite(s): MEAM
210, 211, MATH 240 or equivalents.
This course covers the application of classical aircraft performance and design concepts to fixed-wing
and rotary-wing Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs). A survey of the latest developments in UAV
technology will be used to motivate the development of quantitative mission requirements, such as
payload, range, endurance, field length, and detectability. The implications of these requirements on
vehicle configuration and sizing and will be revealed through application of the fundamentals of
aerodynamics and propulsion systems. The course will also cover basic flight dynamics and control,
including typical inner-loop feedback applications.
544. (MEAM455) Continuum Biomechanics. (A) Prerequisite(s): Statics, linear algebra, and
differential equations.
Biological and non-biological systems are both subject to several basic physical balance laws of broad
engineering importance. Fundamental conservation laws are introduced and illustrated using
examples from both animate as well as inanimate systems. Topics include kinematics of deformation,
the concept of stress, conservation of mass, momentum, and energy. Mechanical constitutive
equations for fluids, solids and intermediate types of media are described and complemented by
hands-on experimental and computational laboratory experiences. Practical problem solving using
numerical methods will be introduced.
550. Design of Microelectromechanical Systems. (M) Prerequisite(s): MEAM 354 or equivalent is
recommended.
A course that covers the design and fabrication of micro- and nano-electromechanical systems. Topics
in the course include micro- and nano-fabrication techniques, mechanics of flexures, thin film
mechanics, sensing and actuation approaches (e.g., electrostatic, plezoelectric, and piezoresistive), as
well as materials and reliability issues. The fundamentals of these topics will be augmented with
device-based case studies.
553. (MSE 561) Atom Mod in Mats Science. (B) Prerequisite(s): Why and what to model: Complex
lattice structures, structures of lattice defects, crystal surfaces, liquids, linking structural studies with
experimental observations, computer experiments. Methods: Molecular statics, molecular dynamics,
Monte Carlo. Evaluation of physical quantities employing averages, fluctuations, correlations,
autocorrelations, radial distribution function, etc. Total energy and interatomic forces; Local density
functional theory and abinitio electronic structure calculations, tight-binding methods, empirical
pontentials for metals, semiconductors and ionic crystals.

Page 10 of 16

MECHANICAL ENGINEERING AND APPLIED MECHANICS
(EG) {MEAM}
554. (MEAM454) Mechanics of Materials. (M) Prerequisite(s): MEAM 210, MEAM 354, MATH 240,
241. This course is cross-listed with an advanced level undergraduate course. It may be taken by
M.S.E. students for credit. M.S.E. students will be required to do some extra work, they will be graded
on a different scale than undergraduate students, and they will be required to demonstrate a higher
level of maturity in their class assignments.
Rods and trusses. Stress. Principal stresses. Strain. Compatibility. Elastic stress-strain relations. Strain
energy. Plane strain. Plane stress. Bending of beams. Torsion. Rotating disks. Castigliano's Theorem.
Dummy loads. Principle of virtual work. The Rayleigh-Ritz methods. Introduction to the finite element
method. Non-linear material behavior. Yielding. Failure.
L/R 555. (BE 555, CBE 555) Nanoscale Systems Biology. (C) Prerequisite(s): Background in
Biology, Chemistry or Engineering with coursework in thermodynamics or permission of the instructor.
From single cell manipulations down to studies of single nanoparticles and single molecules, basic
cell- molecular biology and biotechnologies are increasingly 'nano' as well as quantitative. Lectures
and laboratories in this course start with nano aspects of optical detection, address the basic
thermodynamics of biomolecular interactions, and then cover genomic scale devices. Nanoprobe
methods are then complemented by basic theories of self-assembly and polymers as well as
application in drug delivery and virus engineering with analyses of limitations imposed by the innate
immune system. Skills in analytical and professional presentations, papers and laboratory work will be
developed.
L/R 561. Thermodynamics: Foundations, Energy, Materials. (M) Prerequisite(s): Undergraduate
thermodynamics.
To introduce students to advanced classical equilibrium thermodynamics based on Callen's
postulatory approach, to exergy (Second-Law) analysis, and to fundamentals of nonequilibrium
thermodynamics. Applications to be treated include the thermodynamic foundations of energy
processes and systems including advanced power generation and aerospace propulsion cycles,
batteries and fuel cells, combustion, diffusion, transport in membranes, materials properties and
elasticity, superconductivity, biological processes.
564. (ESE 460, ESE 574) The Principles and Practice of Microfabrication Technology. (A)
Prerequisite(s): Any of the following courses: ESE 218, MSE 321, MEAM 333, CHE 351, CHEM
321/322, Phys 250 or permission of the instructor.
A laboratory course on fabricating microelectronic and micromechanical devices using
photolithographic processing and related fabrication technologies. Lectures discuss: clean room
procedures, microelectronic and microstructural materials, photolithography, diffusion, oxidation,
materials deposition, etching and plasma processes. Basic laboratory processes are covered in the
first two thirds of the course with students completing structures appropriate to their major in the final
third. Students registering for ESE 574 will be expected to do extra work (including term paper and
additional project).
L/R 570. (CBE 640) Transport Processes I. (A)
The course provides a unified introduction to momentum, energy (heat), and mass transport
processes. The basic mechanisms and the constitutive laws for the various transport processes will be
delineated, and the conservation equations will be derived and applied to internal and external flows
featuring a few examples from mechanical, chemical, and biological systems. Reactive flows will also
be considered.

Page 11 of 16

MECHANICAL ENGINEERING AND APPLIED MECHANICS
(EG) {MEAM}
571. Advanced Topics in Transport Phenomena. (M) Prerequisite(s): Either MEAM 570, MEAM 642,
CHE 640 or equivalent, or Written permission of the Instructor.
The course deals with advanced topics in transport phenomena and is suitable for graduate students
in mechanical, chemical and bioengineering who plan to pursue research in areas related to transport
phenomena or work in an industrial setting that deals with transport issues. Topics include: Transport
processes with drops, Bubbles and particles; Phase change Phenomena: -condensation, evaporation,
and combustion; Radiation heat transfer: non-participating media, participating media, equation of
radiative transfer, optically thin and thick limits; Introduction to Hydrodynamic and Thermal Instability;
Microscale energy transport; Nano-particle motion in fluids and transport.
572. Micro/Nanoscale Energy Transport. (M) Prerequisite(s): Undergraduate thermodynamics and
heat transfer (or equivalent), or permission of the instructor. Undergraduates may enroll with
permission of the instructor.
As materials and devices shrink to the micro- and nanoscale, they transmit heat, light and electronic
energy much differently than at the macroscopic length scales. This course provides a foundation for
studying the transport of thermal,optical, and electronic energy from a microscopic perspective.
Concepts from solid state physics and statistical mechanics will be introduced to analyze the influence
of small characteristic dimensions on the propagatin of crystal vibratins, electrons, photons, and
molecules. Applications to mdern microdevices and therometry techniques will be discussed. Topics to
be covered include natural and fabricated microstructures, transport and scattering of phonons and
electrons in solids, photon-phonon and photon-electron interactions, radiative recombinations,
elementary kinetic theory, and the Boltzmann transport equation.
575. Micro and Nano Fluidics. (M)
The course focuses on topics relevant for micro-fluidics, lab on chip technology, point of care
diagnostics, nano-technology, biosensing, and interfacial phenomena. Although we will discuss briefly
the fabrication of micro and nano fluidic devices, the course will mostly focus on physical phenomena
from the continuum point of view. The mathematical complexity will be kept to a minimum. The course
will be reasonably self-contained, and any necessary background material will be provided, consistent
with the students' background and level of preparation.
Specifically, we will examine fluid and nanoparticle transport under the action of pressure, electric,
magnetic, and capillary forces; the structure and role of superhydrophobic surfaces; how the solid/
liquid interface acquires electric charge; ion transport in electrolytes (Poisson-Nernst-Planck
equations); colloid stability; electroosmosis, electrophoresis, and particle polarization; electrowetting
and digital microfluidics; particle and cell sorting; immunoassays; and enzymatic amplification of
nucleic acids.
580. Electrochemistry for Energy, Nanofabrication and Sensing. (C) Prerequisite(s):
Undergraduate course in Fluid Mechanics (MEAM 302), and in Heat and Mass Transfer (MEAM 333).
Principles and mathematical models of electrochemical processes in energy conversion and storage,
water desalination, nanofabrication, electroplating, and sensing for engineering and science graduate
students and advanced undergraduates, lacking prior background in electrochemistry. The course
covers equivalent circuits, electrode kinetics, electrokinetic and transport phenomena, and
electrostatics. The course will introduce and use the finite element program COMSOLTM. We will
discuss, among other things, applications to stationary and flow batteries, supercapacitors, integrated
electric circuit fabrication, electrokinetics, and biosensing. In contrast to CBE 545 Electrochemical
Energy Conversion that focuses on solid state electrochemistry, this course emphasizes liquid-based
electrochemistry.
597. Master's Thesis Research. (C)

Page 12 of 16

MECHANICAL ENGINEERING AND APPLIED MECHANICS
(EG) {MEAM}
599. Master's Independent Study. (C)
613. (CBE 617, CIS 613, ESE 617) Nonlinear Control Theory. (M) Prerequisite(s): A sufficient
background to linear algebra (ENM 510/511 or equivalent) and a course in linear control theory
(MEAM 513 or equivalent), or written permission of the instructor.
The course studies issues in nonlinear control theory, with a particular emphasis on the use of
geometric principles. Topics include: controllability, accessibility, and observability, for nonlinear
systems; Forbenius' theorem; feedback and input/outpub linearization for SISO and MIMO systems;
dynamic extension; zero dynamics; output tracking and regulation; model matching disturbance
decoupling; examples will be taken from mechanical systems, robotic systems, including those
involving nonholonomic constraints, and active control of vibrations.
L/R 625. Haptic Interfaces. (M) Prerequisite(s): Graduate standing in engineering and MEAM 510
(Mechatronics), MEAM 520 (Intro to Robotics), MEAM 535 (Advanced Dynamics) or equivalent.
Undergraduates require permission.
This class provides a graduate-level introduction to the field of haptics, which involves human
interaction with real, remote, and virtual objects through the sense of touch. Haptic interfaces employ
specialized robotic hardware and unique computer algorithms to enable users to explore and
manipulate simulated and distant environments. Primary class topics include human haptic sensing
and control, haptic interface design, virtual environment rendering methods, teleoperation control
algorithms, and system evaluation; current applications for these technologies will be highlighted, and
important techniques will be demonstrated in a laboratory setting. Coursework includes problem sets,
programming assignments, reading and discussion of research papers, and a final project. Appropriate
for students in any engineering discipline with interest in robotics, dynamic systems, controls, or
human-computer interaction.
620. Advanced Robotics. (B) Prerequisite(s): Graduate standing in engineering and MEAM 535 or
ESE 500 or CIS 580 or MEAM 520.
This course covers advanced topics in robotics and includes such topics as multi-body dynamics,
nonlinear control theory and planning algorithms with application to robots and systems of multiple
robots.
630. Advanced Continuum Mechanics. (M) Prerequisite(s): One graduate level course in applied
mathematics and one in either fluid or Solid Mechanics.
This course is a more advanced version of MEAM 530. The topics to be covered include: tensor
algebra and calculus, Lagrangian and Eulerian kinematics; Cauchy and Piola-Kirchhoff stresses.
General principles: conservation of mass, conservation of linear and angular momentum, energy and
the first law of hermodynamics, entropy and the second law of thermodynamics. Constitutive theory,
ideal fluids, Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluids, finite elasticity, linear elasticity, materials with
microstructure.
631. Advanced Elasticity. (M) Prerequisite(s): MEAM 519 or permission of instructor.
Reciprocal theorem. Uniqueness. Variational theorems. Rayleigh-Ritz, Galerkin, and weighted residue
methods. Three-dimensional solutions and potentials. Papkovitch-Neuber formulation. Problems of
Boussinesq and Mindlin. Hertz theory of contact stress.

Page 13 of 16

MECHANICAL ENGINEERING AND APPLIED MECHANICS
(EG) {MEAM}
632. Plasticity. (M) Prerequisite(s): MEAM 519 or permission of instructor.
Plastic yield conditions and associated flow rules. Phenomenological theories for strain-hardening
plasticity. Large strain theory. Physical theories of single crystal and polycrystal plasticity. Boundary
value problems and plane strain slipline fields. Variational principles and limit analysis. Creep.
Applications to structures, metal forming, friction and wear, contact, and fracture.
633. Mechanics of Plastic Flow and Fracture. (M) Prerequisite(s): Background equivalent to MEAM
519 and ENM 510.
This course focuses on mechanics aspects of localized plastic flow and fracture. Topics include: yield
criteria, plastic flow rules, phenomenological theories, linear analysis of cracks in elastic materials,
non-linear analysis of cracks in elastic-plastic materials, fracture parameter and J-integral methods
with and applications to strain localization, crack growth, and stability. Micro-mechanical models of
strain localization and fracture are analyzed using non-linear elasticity, plane strain slip line
incremental elastic-plastic boundary value problems, and energy methods. Applications to various
material systems and processes, including layered materials, forming, friction and wear, and contact.
634. Rods and Shells. (M) Prerequisite(s): First-year graduate-level applied mathematics for
engineers (ENM 510 and 511) and a first course in continuum mechanics or elasticity or permission of
instructor.
This course is intended for 2nd year graduate students and introduces continuum mechanics theory of
rods and shells with applications to structures and to biological systems as well as stability and
buckling. The course begins with topics from differential geometry of curves and surfaces and the
associated tensor analysis on Riemannian spaces. A brief introduction to variational calculus is
included since variational methods are a powerful tool for formulating approximate structural
mechanics theories and for numerical analysis. The structural mechanics theories of rods, plates and
shells are introduced including both linear and nonlinear theories.
635. Composite Materials. (M) Prerequisite(s): ENM 510. Corequisite(s): ENM 511.
This course deals with the prediction of the average, or effective properties of composite materials.
The emphasis will be on methods for determining effective behavior. The course will be concerned
mostly with linear mechanical and physical properties, with particular emphasis on the effective
conductivity and elastic moduli of multi-phase composites and polycrystals. However, time-dependent
and non-linear properties will also be discussed.
637. (AMCS637, MSE 637) Modern Applications of Dynamics. (C) When demand permits.
This course is targeted at engineering, physical science, computational and mathematics Ph.D.
students. The course focuses on techniques for the simulation/modeling of materials on a time and/or
length scale that is large compared with atomistic/molecular but with structure that is fine on the scale
of typical (homogenized) continuum theory. The course explores kinetic models, defect dynamics, and
statistical mechanics models and their implementation in computer simulation.
642. Advanced Fluid Mechanics. (C)
Fluid mechanics as a vector field theory; basic conservation laws, constitutive relations, boundary
conditions, Bernoulli theorems, vorticity theorems, potential flow. Viscous flow; large Reynolds number
limit; boundary layers.

Page 14 of 16

MECHANICAL ENGINEERING AND APPLIED MECHANICS
(EG) {MEAM}
647. Fundamentals of Complex Fluids. (M) Prerequisite(s): ENM 510, MEAM 530 or MEAM 570, or
permission of the instructor.
Complex fluids are a broad class of materials. They are usually homogeneous at the macroscopic
scale and disordered at the microscopic scale, but possess structure at an intermediate scale. The
macroscopic behavior of these fluids is controlled by the fluid intermediate scale. This course will cover
the basic concepts of structure, dynamics, and flow properties of polymers, colloids, liquid crystals,
and other substances with both liquid and solid-like characteristics. Both the experimental and
theoretical aspects of rheology will be discussed. The basic forces influencing complex fluid rheology
will be outlined and discussed. These include van der Waals, electrostatic, excluded volume and other
interactions. Methods for characterizing structure will be covered including scattering techniques,
optical microscopy. Examples will focus on several types of complex fluids such as polymeric solutions
and melts, emulsions & foams, gelling systems, suspensions and self-assembling fluids.
646. Computational Mechanics. (M) Prerequisite(s): ENM 510, ENM 511, and one graduate level
introductory course in mechanics. FORTRAN or C programming experience is necessary.
The course is divided into two parts. The course first introduces general numerical techniques for
elliptical partial differential equations - finite difference method, finite element method and spectral
method. The second part of the course introduces finite volume method. SIMPLER formulation for the
Navier-Stokes equations will be fully described in the class. Students will be given chances to modify a
program specially written for this course to solve some practical problems in heat transfer and fluid
flows.
650. (MSE 650) MECH OF NANO&BIOMATERIAL. (C)
L/R 662. (BE 662, CBE 618) Advanced Molecular Thermodynamics. (A)
Review of classical thermodynamics. Phase and chemical equilibrium for multicomponent systems.
Prediction of thermodynamic functions from molecular properties. Concepts in applied statistical
mechanics. Modern theories of liquid mixtures.
663. Entropic Forces in Biomechanics. (C)
This course is targeted for engineering/physics students working in the areas of nano/bio technology.
The course will start with a quick review of statistical mechanics and proceed to topics such as
Langevin dynamics, solution biochemistry (Poisson-Boltzmann and Debye-Huckel theory), entropic
elasticity of bio-polymers and networks, reaction rate kinetics, solid state physics and other areas of
current technological relevance. Students will be expected to have knowledge of undergraduate
mechanics, physics and thermodynamics.
690. Advanced Topics in Thermal Fluid Science or Energy. (M)
This course will be offered when demand permits. The topics will change due to the interest and
specialties of the instructor(s). Some topics could include: Computational Fluid Mechanics,
Visualization of Computational Results, Free Surface Flows, Fluid Mechanics of the Respiratory
System, and transport in Reacting Systems.
691. Special Topics in Mechanics of Materials. (M)
This course will be offered when demand permits. The topics will change due to the interests and
specialties of the instructor(s). Some topics could include: Compliant Mechanisms, Optimal Control,
and Fluid-Structure interaction.

Page 15 of 16

MECHANICAL ENGINEERING AND APPLIED MECHANICS
(EG) {MEAM}
692. Topics in Mechanical Systems. (M)
This course will be offered when demand permits. The topics will change due to the interests and
specialties of the instructor(s). Some topics could include: Electromagnetics, Control Theory, and
Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems.
SM 699. MEAM Seminar. (C)
The seminar course has been established so that students get recognition for their seminar
attendance as well as to encourage students to attend. Students registered for this course are
required to attend weekly departmental seminars given by distinguished speakers from around the
world. There will be no quizzes, tests, or homeworks. The course will be graded S/U. In order to obtain
a satisfactory (S) grade, the student will need to attend more than 70% of the departmental seminars.
Participation in the seminar course will be documented and recorded on the students transcript. In
order to obtain their degree, doctoral students will be required to accumulate six seminar courses and
MS candidates (beginning in the Fall 2001) two courses. Under special circumstances, i.e. in case of
conflict with a course, the student may waive the seminar requirement for a particular semester by
petition to the Graduate Group Chair.
895. Teaching Practicum. (C)
This course provides training in the practical aspects of teaching. The students will attend seminars
emphasizing teaching and communication skills, deliver demonstration lectures, lead recitations, lead
tutorials, supervise laboratory experiments, develop instructional laboratories, develop instructional
material, prepare and grade homework; grade laboratory reports, and prepare and grade
examinations. Some of the recitations will be supervised and feedback and comments will be provided
to the student by the faculty responsible for the course. At the completion of the 0.5 c.u. of teaching
practicum, the student will receive a Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory grade and a written evaluation signed
by the faculty member responsible for the course. The evaluation will be based on comments of the
students taking the course and the impressions of the faculty in charge.
899. Independent Study. (C)
For students who are studying specific advanced subject areas in mechanical engineering and applied
mechanics. Before the beginning of the term, the student must submit a proposal outlining and
detailing the study area, along with the faculty supervisor's consent, to the graduate group chair for
approval. At the conclusion of the independent study, the student should prepare a brief report.
990. Masters Thesis.
Master's Thesis
995. Dissertation.
999. Thesis/Dissertation Research. (C) Both terms.
For students working on an advanced research program leading to the completion of master's thesis
or Ph.D. dissertation requirements.

Page 16 of 16

