MANAGEMENT
(WH) {MGMT}
000. Study Abroad.
L/R 100. Leadership and Communication in Groups. This course is exclusively reserved for
Wharton undergraduate students.
Through the process of action, reflection, and experimentation, and application, MGMT 100 aims to
develop your leadership, teamwork, and communication skills. The course provides many occasions to
strengthen your ability to exercise leadership through service, to speak and write persuasively, and to
work collaboratively with a diverse group of individuals. Through the course of the term, you will have a
heightened sense of your individual strengths and opportunities for growth.
Eleven sections of approximately 60 students are scheduled each year (nine in the fall; two in the
spring). Attached to each section are six recitations. Your recitation determines your project team.
Whether you are in lecture participating in role plays or simulations, in recitation doing impromptu
speeches, or out in the field working on your project, Management 100 is highly interactive and
participative. The hallmark of the course is experiential learning.
Over the course of the year, Management 100 teams complete nearly 70 field projects. In the fall,
freshmen participate in community service projects, a good number supplied by the United Way; in the
spring, upper level transfer and dual degree students work on consulting projects vetted by Wharton's
Small Business Development Center (SBDC).
101. Introduction To Management. (C) Prerequisite(s): None.
This course is an introduction to the critical management skills involved in planning, structuring,
controlling and leading an organization. It provides a framework for understanding issues involved in
both managing and being managed, and it will help you to be a more effective contributor to
organizations that you join. We develop a "systems" view of organizations, which means that we
examine organizations as part of a context, including but not limited to environment, strategy,
structure, culture, tasks, people and outputs. We consider how managerial decisions made in any one
of these domains affect decisions in each of the others.
104. (SOCI105) Industrial Relations and Human Resource Management. (C) Prerequisite(s):
MGMT 100 & MGMT 101.
The focus of Management 104 is the economic and institutional constraints on organizations in the
formulation and implementation of human resources management policies and strategies in the United
States and, as appropriate, internationally. The specific constraints discussed are labor markets
(external and internal), labor laws (governing employment policies and employee relations), and labor
unions (and the threat thereof). Particular attention is paid to the relationship of these constraints to
the competitiveness of American enterprise in the global economy.
111. Multinational Management. Prerequisite(s): MGMT 100 & MGMT 101.
Multinational management is the study of the international corporation and the global political and
economic environment. This course provides an introduction to the more advanced offerings. It covers
the historical origins of the multinational corporation, the economics of trade, money and investment in
the world economy, and the policies and behavior of governments and international organizations. We
place considerable emphasis in understanding the national and historic origins of the international
firm, as well as on current issues regarding emerging economies and shifts in the political economy of
global markets.

Page 1 of 12

MANAGEMENT
(WH) {MGMT}
205. Multinational Corporate Strategies. (B) Prerequisite(s): MGMT 100, MGMT 101, & MGMT 111.
This course focuses on the creation of competitive advantage in the multinational firm. It examines the
nature of global competition by exploring the characteristics of global versus non-global industries and
firms. We also explore different types of international strategy and structure and examine the specific
challenges of managing in multiple countries and markets. Finally, we consider the strategic allocation
of resources along the value chain and the role of strategic alliances as a crucial element of an
effective global strategy.
208. Globalization and International Political Economy. (B)
Globalization and International Political Economy is an upper level undergraduate course designed to
provide the background necessary to understand globalization and the changes taking place in the
international political-economy. The course objective is to help students develop a conceptual
framework that will provide an understanding of the current international political-economic
environment, provide a basis for thinking about the fundamental changes which are now taking place,
and to build a solid foundation to which new material can be added throughout the students' careers.
Format: Class discussions will be interactive and structured to encourage maximum student
participation.
Requirements: Take home mid-term exam, a final course paper of 10-15 pages and two shorter (1-2
page papers) dealing with the readings for the day. Students will not be allowed to enroll after the third
class session.
209. The Political Environment of the Multinational Firm.
Are you well prepared to manage or analyze business challenges and competitive threats in a variety
of political and social environments? For example, what should you do to dissuade or counter an
individual critic armed with a camera phone a YouTube account? Or a decentralized grassroots
organization that seemingly pops up overnight, appears to have no single leader or headquarters, and
yet is quite successful in capturing media attention? Or a government official who because of a tight
reelection campaign or an internal challenge from a populist general turns on you? Lone individuals,
small activist groups and unexpected political shifts have done extensive damage to the reputations and value - of multinationals in recent years. And yet most companies don't plan for, or even think
about, investing in building the kinds of solid relationships with community leaders, governments,
NGOs, and other key players that can help them avoid such crises and, when necessary, draw upon
their reservoir of stakeholder capital to respond quickly and decisively when a challenge or threat
emerges. This semester-long class provides an integrative perspective towards the management of
these risks and opportunities.
It highlights that better assessment of stakeholder opinion, understanding of how stakeholders
impact firm value and of how to infuse stakeholder relationships with trust to unlock that value are
increasingly critical elements of a firm's long-term success, particularly in emerging markets. Firms
must also focus o n continual improvement in their stakeholder engagement, reinforcing their actions
with strategic communications and via organizational culture. The course will give students a
combination of practical tools and the latest academic thinking in the emerging field of corporate
diplomacy.

Page 2 of 12

MANAGEMENT
(WH) {MGMT}
211. Competitive Strategy. (A) Prerequisite(s): MGMT 100 & MGMT 101 and some knowledge of
microeconomics is suggested. The course will be discussion oriented and based largely on case
materials and mini-lectures.
This is an advanced course in competitive strategy. The course will apply the tools of industrial
organization economics and game theory to examine the strategic decisions that managers make. We
will examine those decisions concerning pricing, capacity investment, advertising, new product
introductions, and research and development. Emphasis will be placed on the strategic interaction
among rival sellers. In particular we will look at the various methods of entry deterrence and strategic
commitment. The course will attempt to integrate traditional economic models with case study
materials.
212. (MGMT810) Social Entrepreneurship. (B) Prerequisite(s): MGMT 230 Recommended.
The basic thesis of this elective course is that some societal problems, if attacked entrepreneurially,
create opportunities for launching businesses that simultaneously generate profits and alleviate the
societal problem. This approach generates societal wealth as well as entrepreneurial wealth. The
course is distinguished from public sector initiatives to address social problems. Student teams are
expected to develop a plan to launch a societal wealth generating business. The preference is for them
to begin the course with already conceived ideas for entrepreneurial solutions to social problems. They
may also join a team to work on a project proposed by a student who already has a business idea.
Format: Lecture, discussion, live case studies (discussions of progress reports of students own
ventures).
223. Business Strategy and Policy. Prerequisite(s): MGMT 100 & 101; seniors and juniors that have
completed introductory courses in finance, marketing, and accounting.
This course encourages students to analyze the problems of managing the total enterprise in the
domestic and international setting. The focus is on the competitive strategy of the firm, examining
issues central to its long- and short-term competitive position. Students act in the roles of key
decision-makers or their advisors and solve problems related to the development or maintenance of
the competitive advantage of the firm in a given market. The first module of the course develops an
understanding of key strategic frameworks using theoretical readings and case-based discussions.
Students will learn concepts and tools for analyzing the competitive environment, strategic position
and firm-specific capabilities in order to understand the sources of a firm's competitive advantage. In
addition, students will address corporate strategy issues such as the economic logic and
administrative challenges associated with diversification choices about horizontal and vertical
integration. The second module will be conducted as a multi-session, computer-based simulation in
which students will have the opportunity to apply the concepts and tools from module 1 to make
strategic decisions.
The goal of the course is for students to develop an analytical tool kit for understanding strategic
issues and to enrich their appreciation for the thoughtprocesses essential to incisive strategic analysis.
This course offers students the opportunity to develop a general management perspective by
combining their knowledge of specific functional areas with an appreciation forthe requirements posed
by the need to integrate all functions into a coherent whole. Students will develop skills in structuring
and solving complex business problems.

Page 3 of 12

MANAGEMENT
(WH) {MGMT}
233. (MGMT833) Strategies and Practices of Family-Controlled Companies. (B) Prerequisite(s):
None.
This course is designed for those persons who desire to understand the distinct strategies and
practices of family-controlled companies and family wealth creation. It will focus on shareholder
decision making; financial and resource driven options for long-run competitiveness, organizational
structures and management team issues; strategic planning from a resource-based perspective;
transition planning for the corporate entity, family dynamics and communication issues; and leadership
empowerment. The course is intended for those who plan to consult or provide professional services
to family-controlled companies and for those planning a career in their family firm.
Format: The class is structured around topical lectures with frequest utilization of case studies.
There will be in-class discussion, as well as on-site and off-site project work time.
225. (MGMT714) Value Creation and Value Capture in American Business History. Prerequisite
(s): MGMT 100 & MGMT 101.
This course concerns the history of capitalism in America viewed from the perspective of the people
who operated (and in some cases owned) the firms. Its focus is on the activities of value creation and
value capture and on how evolving opportunities and selection pressures have conditioned the historic
development of competition, strategic analysis and initiatives, organizational structures, merger-andacquisition activity, entrepreneurship, and the like. Accounting and control are also part of the story:
the course in fact considers issues arising in a variety of different management disciplines and shows
off their interrelationships. The maintenance (or otherwise) of value capture over the cycle and over
time is a running theme.
The course has a narrative element (running from Franklin's days through the early twenty-first
century) but its deeper purpose is to give students some idea of how to think about the future
evolution of firms and industries. It proceeds through a consideration of actual business decisions and
performance in a series of challenging and otherwise interesting moments in the evolution of the
American business environment. The materials are unusual for the Wharton School--they are often
case-like and when possible draw on documents contemporary to the decisions such as
correspondence, memoranda, minutes of meetings, old newspaper and magazine stories, and
eyewitness accounts. They require thoughtful preparation. This course is much more focused on the
students than many and a successful experience of its demands that the students both engage with
the materials and take an active role in the class discussion. The largest single element in the grading
is a substantial term paper on a topic agreeable to both the student and the instructor. For more
information, please contact the instructor: raff@wharton.upenn.edu.
230. Entrepreneurship. Prerequisite(s): Completion of all business fundamental courses and second
semester sophomore standing. Ideally you will also have mastered the concepts of business policy.
MGMT 230 integrates the material introduced in business fundamental courses and applies it to the
design and evaluation of new ventures. The purpose of this course is to explore the many dimensions
of new venture creation and growth and to foster innovation and new business formations in
independent and corporate settings. The course addresses both a theoretical perspective on venture
initiation and the application of writing an actual business plan.
In this course you are asked to get out of the habit of being a receiver of ideas, facts, concepts and
techniques, and get into the habit of generating ideas, identifying problems, analyzing and evaluation
alternatives, and formulating workable action plans, thus putting textbook knowledge into practice.
Students will get this hands-on experience in the following ways: Through the formation and ongoing
work of venture teams that will design a comprehensive business development plan for a particular
start-up company. Teams are expected to utilize the tools and analytical approaches discussed in
class to their venture. Through lectures and class discussions that are designed to familiarize students
with the many dimensions of entrepreneurship and new venture initiation. Class format varies
throughout the course: in some class sessions, there will be a lecture on specific topics; other
sessions wil consist of case discussions of a particular topic or a discussion of the business concepts
that students are developing; guest speakers also lead and participate in some class sessions.

Page 4 of 12

MANAGEMENT
(WH) {MGMT}
231. (MGMT806) Entrepreneurial Venture Initiation. (B) Prerequisite(s): MGMT 230
(recommended). Students registered for this course should have already written a business plan or
developed a detailed slide deck for their venture (or be planning to work with a classmate on his or her
venture).
MGMT 231 is an advanced sequel to Mgmt.230 focusing on independent entrepreneurship, and
venture implementation. This is the advanced course in entrepreneurship, which builds upon an
existing business plan and focuses on implementation of a business start-up. How do you actually put
your business plan into action to launch a venture? The class draws from management theory on
venture initiation and managing change and growth.
Format: Readings, discussion, and developing an implementation plan for a real venture.
234. (MGMT875) International Comparative Management: The Challenge of Diversity and
Integration. (B) This course is comprised of lectures with case discussions, group and individual
short papers and quizzes on the readings.
This course focuses on the comparative institutional environments in which business, government,
and society interact. It provides students with a set of conceptual tools and analytical frameworks to
navigate the complexities and ambiguities of the global economy. It provides an understanding of how
to identify, measure and interpret the economic, social, political and cultural factors that shape
regulatory policy, business strategy and market outcomes. It does so by traversing a rich empirical
terrain that cuts across developing and industrialized countries, and is especially attentive to change
over time. The course is deeply inter-disciplinary and brings insights from economics, political science,
sociology, anthropology, geography and history.
239. Organization Design.
235. Technological Innovation and Entrepreneurship. (A) Prerequisite(s): MGMT 100 & MGMT
101; open to juniors and seniors in Engineering, Applied Science, and Wharton; others only with
special permission. All students must receive instructor's permission. Graduating M&T students
receive priority enrollment.
The focus of this course is on analysis of the issues and options which must be faced in developing a
successful technological venture and on the creation of a winning business plan. Particular attention is
directed to the identification of technology-based venture opportunities, evaluation of technical
feasibility and commericial potential, and planning for successful commercialization.
237. Management of Technology. (B) Prerequisite(s): MGMT 100 & MGMT 101; this section is based
on seniority and open to Wharton students.
The course is designed to meet the needs of the future managers, entrepreneurs, consultants and
investors who must analyze and develop business strategies in technology-based industries. The
emphasis is on learning conceptual models and frameworks to help navigate the complexity and
dynamism in such industries. This is not a course in new product development or in using information
technology to improve business processes and offerings. We will take a perspective of both
established and emerging firms competing through technological innovations, and study the key
strategic drivers of value creation and appropriation in the context of business ecosystems.

Page 5 of 12

MANAGEMENT
(WH) {MGMT}
238. Organizational Behavior. Prerequisite(s): MGMT 100 & MGMT 101.
Management 238 is an organizational behavior course, examining individual, interpersonal, and group
effectiveness at work. Topics range from decision- making, motivation, and personality to networks,
influence, helping, leadership, teamwork, and organizational culture. The learning method is heavily
experiential, with a focus on applying key principles to the human side of management in role-play
exercises, simulations, and group projects in local organizations. This course requires the instructor's
permission. Registration is by application only; Penn In Touch requests will not be processed. The link
to the application form will be available on the Management Department's website: https://
mgmt.wharton.upenn.edu/programs/undergraduate, beginning March 14, 2016. The deadline for
applications is March 25, 2016 at 5 PM. Students will be notified after April 1, 2016 regarding the
status of their application.
240. Group Dynamics.
Section 001 -- Open to all Juniors and Seniors. This course develops your knowledge and skills for
designing, leading, and consulting with teams in organizations. The goals are to provide both the
conceptual understanding and the behavioral skills required to improve team effectiveness. This
course makes use of analytic and reflective writing, peer feedback and coaching, simulations, and an
intensive field project with a real team in the Philadelphia area. There are four kinds of teams that are
the focus of your study: teams of which you've been a member in the past; your 240 Team, with three
or four other classmates; a team outside of 240 that your 240 Team will observe, analyze, and report
on -- your Host Team; and a team you expect to be on in the future. The primary case material for
applying course concepts (learned from readings and lectures) will be these teams you know from
direct observation and experience. Expect to leave this course with new knowledge of how to
diagnose and intervene -- as leader, member, or consultant -- to improve the performance
sustainability, and impact on the members of any team. Prerequisite: Junior standing or above.
Special registration for MGMT 240 Section 001: Enrollment in this section of MGMT 240 is by
permission of the instructor, Professor Stew Friedman. To apply for admission, please contact him via
email: friedman@wharton.upenn.edu. He will send you an application, which is due March 30, 2016.
Accepted students will be notified after April 2, 2016.
Section 002 -- Open only to MGMT 100 Teaching Assistants. Permission of instructor is required.
This course develops your knowledge and skills for designing, leading, and consulting with teams in
organizations. The goals are to provide both the conceptual understanding and the behavioral skills
required to improve team effectiveness. This course makes use of readings, analytic and reflective
writing, assessments, peer feedback and coaching, simulations, and your services as a MGMT 100
Teaching Assistant (TA). There are four kinds of teams that are the focus of your study: teams of which
youo've been a member in the past; your 240 Team, with two or three other classmates; the team of
Wharton freshmen in your MGMT 100 section for whom you serve as TA; and a team you expect to be
on in the future. The primary case material for applying course concepts (learned from readings and
lectures) will be these teams you know from direct observation and experience. Expect to leave this
course with new knowledge of how to diagnose and intervene -- as leader, member, or consultant -- to
improve the performance, sustainability, and impact on the members of any team. Prerequisite:
Sophomore standing or above and assignment as MGMT 100 TA.
251. Consulting to Growth Companies. (A) Prerequisite(s): Junior or Senior Standing
Recommended.
This course offers students a unique opportunity to develop consulting skills and entrepreneurial
expertise by working as consultants to thriving entrepreneurial ventures in the Philadelphia area. This
capstone course combines both fieldwork and class work and allows students to apply knowledge and
skills acquired through other course work to real world issues that must be addressed by operating
companies. An understanding of characteristics producing rapid entrepreneurial growth and skills
related to effective communications and management of a business relationship are emphasized.
Format: Team term consulting assignment, lectures, case analysis, and small group discussions.

Page 6 of 12

MANAGEMENT
(WH) {MGMT}
241. Knowledge for Social Impact: Analyzing Current Issues & Approaches. Klein, Katherine.
Recent technological changes have raised awareness of the magnitude and devastating long-term
effects of poverty, food insecurity, limited and unequal access to education, and other social issues.
Coupled with growing awareness of these issues is the emerging sense that traditional government
programs and charities may be unable to solve these problems - at least, not alone. What may be
needed are new strategies - strategies borne of (a) a deep understanding of the issues; (b)
interdisciplinary collaboration; and (c) access to business knowledge, frameworks, and resources.
This course is designed to provide the information, strategies, examples, and analytical mindset to
make students more rigorous, insightful, and effective in analyzing social ills and crafting potential
solutions. Together, a cross-disciplinary group of undergraduate students, including students in
Wharton, the College, and other Penn Schools, will examine the nature and extent of two pressing
social problems - food insecurity and barriers to post-secondary education - and current approaches
to solving these problems.
After an introduction to the social impact landscape and review of frameworks and tools for social
impact, we will meet with researchers, business leaders, and non-profit leaders to learn what's not
working, what is working, and what might work even better.
247. (LGST208, MGMT795) Employment Law.
249. Mergers and Acquisitions. Prerequisite(s): MGMT 100 & MGMT 101.
This course explores the role of mergers and acquisitions and alternative methods of corporate
development in advancing the strategies of operating business. Emphasis is on the way companies
use acquisitions to alter business mixes; seize opportunities in new products, technologies and
markets; enhance competitive positioning; adjust to changing economics, and promote value-creating
growth. Although the course will emphasize strategic acquisitions, it also will explore leveraged buyouts and hostile financial acquisitions as well as their influence on corporate buyers. Please note that
you must fulfill the prerequisites in order to enroll in this class. Requests for this course should be
submitted to: MGMT-Courseinfo@wharton.upenn.edu.
264. Venture Capital and Entrepreneurial Management. (A) Prerequisite(s): Junior or Senior
Standing Recommended.
This course focuses on venture capital management issues in the context of a high-growth potential
start-up company. The course is motivated by rapid increases in both the supply of and demand for
private equity over the past two decades. The topic is addressed from two distinct perspectives: issues
that relate to the demand for private equity and venture capital (the entrepreneur's perspective) on the
one hand, and issues that relate to the supply of capital (the investor's perspective) on the other. As
well, we will address management issues that relate to how the VC and the entrepreneur work
together once an investment has been made, compensation issues, and governance issues in the
privately held venture capital backed company.
Format: Case/discussion format, supplemented by lectures and guest speakers.
Requirements: Classroom participation, written case assignments, late midterm.
Materials: Required coursepack and supplemental recommended reading.

Page 7 of 12

MANAGEMENT
(WH) {MGMT}
265. Culture of Technology: Culture & Institutions of the Tech Sector--Bridging Research and
Practice. Vice Dean Lori Rosenkopf.
Academics, students and practitioners alike are fascinated by the culture of tech sector--its people,
practices, and organization. In this course we explore this sector using a combination of academic
research papers and practitioner involvement. Each class session will be devoted to discussion of a
single research article, during which we will be joined via Telepresence technology by a Wharton alum
from the tech sector whose expertise is relevant to the paper topic. Therefore, the learning objectives
of this half-credit course are to: 1)Understand the managerial, organizational, and regional institutions
that characterize the tech sector, with particular emphasis on the case of Silicon Valley 2)Bridge
research and practice by critical analysis of academic research in conjunction with practitioner input 3)
Forge connections with tech sector practitioners, particularly with our west coast alumni base.
Registration is by application only; Penn In Touch requests will not be processed. Enrollment is limited.
The link to the application form will be available on the Management Department's website: https://
mgmt.wharton.upenn.edu/programs/undergraduate, beginning March 21, 2016 through midnight on
April 3, 2016.
Students will be granted permits to enroll after a review of the applications (no later than April 8).
The deadline to apply is Sunday, April 3, 2016.
276. Cultivating Judgment Skills: Forecasting in Business Politics.
This course will explore the diverse ways in which scholars and practitioners have defined "good
judgment." And it will introduce students to practical tools for assessing and improving judgment, with
special emphasis on probabilistic reasoning. Students will have the opportunity both to fine-tune their
personal judgment skills as well as to master and then weave together insights from several bodies of
scientific knowledge, including frequentist and Bayesian statistics, psychological work on judgment
and choice, group dynamics, organizational behavior and political science (key concepts discussed in
Tetlock's (2015) book "Superforecasting").
We will focus on bottom-line accuracy in sizing up real world problems. Class work will be primarily
exercises, including working as an individual and in teams. You will have opportunities to forecast on a
wide range of political, business, and macro-economic questions, which we will use as feedback tools
to help you calibrate your judgment. Assessments include a weekly concept test and a final group
presentation aimed to help you improve your judgment. The goal is to launch you on the lifelong
process of learning how much trust you should place in your judgments of trustworthiness.
Finally, note this has been approved by the Curriculum Committee effective 11/11/15.
266. (MGMT766) Family Enterprise Mgmt..
This class will examine the causes and consequences of the creation of family fortunes, with a focus
on the practical implications for family decision-making. We will discuss psychological characteristics
associated with the typically entrepreneurial creators of family wealth; with their children, whose
childhood development takes place in the context of growing businesses and accumulating wealth;
and with their grandchildren and beyond, whose childhood development occuring in the context of
established and often very public wealth, to build a comprehensive view of the interplay between
familydynamics and economic decision making. Note that this class focus will be on behavioral
aspects of family dynamics in a wide range of decision settings, rather than on management of an
operating business per se. While this class will be particularly relevant to individuals aspiring to create
their own family fortunes or whose ancestors have already done so, it will also be useful for individuals
interested in foundation management, non-profit fund-raising or business catering to the very wealthy
such as asset management and luxury retail.

Page 8 of 12

MANAGEMENT
(WH) {MGMT}
272. Power and Politics in Organizations.
The purpose of this course is to introduce you to the power dynamics in organizations. The course is
designed so that you will learn concepts that are useful for understanding, analyzing, and harnessing
power. But beyond discovering ways to extend your own power, influence and political skill in
organizations, we will also uncover lessons about ways in which power and politics can blind you, and
how to navigate situations in which you are up against powerful people. Using a range of theoretical
and business articles, cases, exercises, assessments and simulations, we will extract a variety of
lessons about power and politics in organizations. Topics include political skill, influence, issue selling,
change management, networks, hierarchy, political conflict, corruption, coping with intolerable bosses,
speaking up, redemption, and downsizing.
288. (MGMT788) Managing and Competing in China. (A)
This course provides an examination of some of the largest busines firms in thePeoples Republic of
China, acquainting students with the governance and management (both management structure and
management teams) of some of the largest and best known Chinese firms. Students will also become
acquainted withthe capabilities and liabilities of Chinese firms and their strategic options. Tools needed
to assess the investment potential of Chinese firms will be provided, and students will have an
opportunity to do original research on issues of governance and management of Chinese firms.
291. (LGST206, OIDD291) Negotiations. Prerequisite(s): MGMT 100 & MGMT 101.
This course includes not only conflict resolution but techniques which help manage and even
encourage the valuable aspects of conflict. The central issues of this course deal with understanding
the behavior of individuals, groups, and organizations in conflict management situations. The purpose
of this course is to understand the theory and processes of negotiations as it is practiced ina variety of
settings. The course is designed to be relevant to the broad specturm of problems that are faced by
the manager and professional including management of multinationals, ethical issues, and alternative
dispute resolutions. Cross listed w/ LGST 206 & OPIM 291.
292. (LGST292, OIDD292) Advanced Negotiation..
353. Wharton Field Challenge. Weigelt and Staff..
http://fap.wharton.upenn.edu/353 Students Info.htm
766. (MGMT266) FAMILY ENTERPRISE MGMT..
This class will examine the causes and consequences of the creation of family fortunes, with a focus
on the practical implications for family decision-making. We will discuss psychological characteristics
associated with the typically entrepreneurial creators of family wealth; with their children, whose
childhood development takes place in the context of growing businesses and accumulating wealth;
and with their grandchildren and beyond, whose childhood development occurin the context of
established and often very public wealth, to build a comprehensive view of the interplay between
family dynamics and economic decision making. Note that this class focus will be on behavioral
aspects of family dynamics in a wide range of decision settings, rather than on management of an
operating business per se. While this class will be particularly relevant to individuals aspiring to create
their own family fortunes or whose ancestors have already done so, it will also be useful for individuals
interested in foundation management, non-profit fund-raising or business catering to the very wealthy
such as asset management and luxury retail.
Format: The class will consist of a mixture of lectures, case discussions and class exercises.
Submission of several written case studies, and a final examination are required.

Page 9 of 12

MANAGEMENT
(WH) {MGMT}
610. Foundations of Teamwork and Leadership.
Management 610 is the first core course in the MBA Program and it cannot be waived The first week
of the fall term (in August) is dedicated to this formative and foundational experience. This course
focuses on developing students' knowledge and skill set for teamwork and leadership. It is meant to be
an intense immersion experience that draws strongly on the pedagogy of the Wharton Teamwork and
Leadership Simulation, a team-based, highly interactive simulation that was custom-designed
specifically to allow students to experience the core concepts they learn in this class. The three goals
of thiscourse are for students to learn: 1. Leadership behaviors: how to enact the skills that contribute
to a team's effective performance. 2. Team dynamics: how to be an effective team member, as well as
how to best design work teams; 3. Organizational awareness: understanding organizational culture.
Format: A custom-designed Wharton-only simulation is paired with course sessions to deliver a
unique learning experience. Classes will include experiental learning combined with debriefings,
lectures, readings, class discussion and personal and group performance feedback. This course
reflects the realities that informal leadership occurs in teams on an ongoing basis, that being a good
team player is a part of leadership, and that many of one's early experiences with leadership will occur
while working on teams. Because of the team-based nature of this course, and time intensive nature
of this experience, attendance is mandatory for ALL five sessions of this class.
NOTE: Credit-bearing, core coursework begins with the MGMT610: Foundations of Teamwork and
Leadership course.
611. (LAW 517) Managing Established Enterprises.
The management of large, established enterprises creates a range of multi-facet challenges for the
general manager. A general manager needs to understand the internal workings of a firm, how to
assess and create a strategy, and how to take into account increasing, globalization. While these
issues are distinct, they are very much intertwined. As a result, this course will provide you with an
integrated view of these challenges and show you that effective of an established enterprise requires a
combination of insights drawn from economics, sociology, psychology and political economy.

Page 10 of 12

MANAGEMENT
(WH) {MGMT}
612. (LAW 516) Management of Emerging Enterprises.
Emerging enterprises, the focus in this course, are small, new, fast-growing organizations. Their
founders and managers face multifaceted challenges: how to assess the competitive position of their
business model and develop a strategy; how to develop the internal organizational structure, culture,
and policies for selecting and managing employees; and how to pursue global opportunities. We cover
these challenges in separate modules on strategy, human and social capital, and global issues. The
human and social capital module covers classic management challenges of aligning interests of the
individual and the organization; managing individual psychological needs and social influences; and
developing employee capabilities that provide competitive advantage. Also covered are unique
challenges that yound organizations face, i.e. building an effective culture; recruiting, selecting, and
retaining talent; building systematic approaches to motivating employees; coping with the stresses of
rapid growth; and leveraging the benefits (and avoiding the liabilities) of the founder's powerful imprint.
The strategy module covers fundamental issues central to the competitiveness of the enterprise.
Because the strategy field is broad, MGMT 612 emphasizes topics and frameworks that are most
relevant for younger firms, such as innovation, disruption, managing resource constraints, and building
capabilities. However, a key insight of the module is the importance of seeing the playing field from the
perspective of the competition. Thus, by the end of this section, students will have a robust grounding
in strategy that will allow them to succeed, whether their career path leads to a Fortune 100 firm or a
garage start up.
The global module covers the emerging firm's decision about when (and whether) to
internationalize. This decision must address which foreign markets to enter; the mode of entry; the
sequence of moves to develop capabilities; what organizational form to choose; where to establish
HQ; and how to adapt to the unique economic and institutional features of different markets. In all
these issues, the emphasis is on how young, resource-constrained firms can position themselves
profitably in globally competitive markets. For the final project, student teams provide integrated
analysis across the modules for an emerging enterprise of their choice.
776. Cultiv Judgment Skills. Prerequisite(s): None (but an interest in links between business and
politics is helpful).
A world-class poker player defined the difference between serious players and amateurs this way:
serious players know the difference between 40-60 and 60-40 propositions. In other words, serious
players are well calibrated (skilled at distinguishing what they know from what they don't). This course
gives you chances to explore how well calibrated you are in a low-risk setting. The course should
appeal to students with interests in strategy, international business, political-risk analysis, and the
managerial challenges of maximizing the judgmental accuracy of key personnel. The class will pit its
wits against competitors in a global-forecasting tournament sponsored by the Intelligence Advanced
Research Projects Agency (IARPA) - as well as design forecasting exercises around your individual
career and business plans. Key challenges include: (a) learning to translate "interesting questions" into
"testable propositions," (b) getting into the habit of translating vague hunches into probability metrics
and making good use of feedback on how well calibrated you are, (c) applying tools for enhancing
accuracy, (d) making solo forecasts - and exploring methods of making team forecast more than the
sum of their individual-contributor parts.
772. Power and Politics in Organizations.
The purpose of this course is to introduce you to the power dynamics in organizations. The course is
designed so that you will learn concepts that are useful for understanding, analyzing, and harnessing
power. But beyond discovering ways to extend your own power, influence and political skill in
organizations, we will also uncover lessons about ways in which power and politics can blind you,and
how to navigate situations in which you are up against powerful people. Using a range of theoretical
and business articles, cases, exercises, assesments, and simulations, we will extract a variety of
lessons about power and politics in organizations. Topics include political skill, influence, issue selling,
change management, networks, hierarchy, political conflict, corruption, coping with intolerable bosses,
speaking up, redemption, and downsizing.

Page 11 of 12

MANAGEMENT
(WH) {MGMT}
896. DECISION MAKING LDRSHIP.
SM 920. Sem in Hum Res Research.
This class is designed to give students an overview of the fundamental topics and arguments in the
area of employment, how different social science paradigms consider employment topics, and some
the new and emerging approaches to this topic.

Page 12 of 12

