MILITARY SCIENCE
(PV) {MSCI}
Military Science (Army ROTC - Reserve Officers' Training Corps) is open to any student
desiring to earn a commission in the Active Army, US Army Reserve, or Army National Guard
upon graduation.
The primary purpose of Army ROTC is to prepare college men and women to serve as
commissioned officers in the US Army. Students enrolled in the ROTC program receive
instruction in fundamentals of leadership with emphasis on self-discipline, integrity,
confidence, and responsibility.
All students enrolled in Military Science courses will participate, unless ineligible or exempt,
in a weekly leadership laboratory (a nominal lab fee is charged), one weekend field training
exercise (FTX) per semester, and a physical training program. This training augments the
classroom instruction and is included into the final grade.
Freshman and sophomore students can enroll in the ROTC Basic Course without incurring
an obligation to serve in the US Army. The term Basic Course refers to first and second year
courses, MSCI 101, 102, 201, and 202, which are designed for beginning students who want to
qualify for entry into the Advanced Course, and for students who may want to try Military
Science without obligations. A number of popular or challenging extracurricular activities are
associated with these courses.
101. Basic Leadership I Laboratory/Practicum. (A) Staff. Corequisite(s): Enrollment in MSCI 110
Basic Leadership I Lecture required. 1 h. No credit, or as awarded by cross-enrolled schools
Provides hands-on experience to reinforce leadership fundamentals, while emphasizing increased
awareness of and proficiency in military skills.
102. Basic Leadership I Laboratory/Practicum. (B) Staff. Corequisite(s): Enrollment in MSCI 120
Basic Leadership I Lecture required. 1 h. No credit, or as awarded by cross-enrolled schools
Provides hands-on experience to reinforce leadership fundamentals, while emphasizing increased
awareness of and proficiency in military skills.
110. Leadership and Personal Development. (A) Staff. Corequisite(s): Enrollment in MSCI 101
Basic Leadership I Lab required. 1.00 CU - Credit excluded from full-time calculation.
Introduces students/cadets to the personal challenges and competencies that are critical for effective
leadership. Focus is placed on developing basic knowledge and comprehension of the U.S. Army's
Leadership Dimensions while gaining a "big picture" understanding of the Army ROTC program, its
purpose in the U.S. Army and our nation, and its advantages for the student. Classes are conducted
for one hour once each week.
120. Foundations In Leadership. (B) Staff. Corequisite(s): Enrollment in MSCI 102 Basic
Leadership I Lab required. 1.00 CU - Credit excluded from full-time calculation.
Reviews leadership fundamentals such as setting direction, problem solving, listening, presenting
briefs, providing feedback and using effective writing skills. Students/cadets are also exposed to key
fundamentals of skills required to be successful as an MS II cadet; namely military map reading and
land navigation, and small unit operations/leadership drills.
201. Basic Leadership 2 Laboratory/Practicum. (A) Staff. Corequisite(s): Enrollment in MSCI 210
Basic Leadership 2 Lecture required. 2 h. No credit, or as awarded by cross-enrolled schools.
Provides hands-on experience to reinforce leadership fundamentals, while emphasizing increased
awareness of and proficiency in military skills.

Page 1 of 4

MILITARY SCIENCE
(PV) {MSCI}
202. Basic Leadership Laboratory/Practicum. (B) Staff. Corequisite(s): Enrollment in MSCI 202
Leadership I Lecture required. 2 h. No credit, or as awarded by cross-enrolled schools
Provides hands-on experience to reinforce leadership fundamentals, while emphasizing increased
awareness of and proficiency in military skills.
Basic Course Leadership Laboratory. 2h. Open only to (and required of) students in the assoicated
Military Science course. Series, with different roles for students at different levels in the program.
Learn and practice basic skills. Gain insight into Advanced Course in order to make an informed
decision whether to apply for it. Build self-confidence and team-building leadership skills that can be
applied throught life.
Basic Course Physical Fitness. Only open to students in MSCI 101,102, 201 and 202. Series, with
different roles for students at different levels in the program. Participate in and learn to lead a
physical fitness program. Emphasis on the development of an individual fitness program and the role
of exercise and fintess is one's life.
Students who continue in the advanced course as juniors and seniors become obligated to serve
either on active duty or in the reserve component. The Advanced Course consists of the courses
MSCI 301, 302, 401 and 402. It is open only to students who have completed the Basic Course or
earned placement credit for the basic course (various methods). The Advanced Course is designed
to qualify a student for a commission as an officer of the United States Army. Students must
complete all courses numbered greater than 300, to include a six-week Advanced Camp during the
summer, usually between the junior and senior years. The courses must be taken in sequence unless
otherwise approved by the Professor of Military Science. All contracted students receive $150 per
month stipend during the school year.
210. Innovative Tactical Leadership. (A) Staff. Corequisite(s): Enrollment in MSCI 201 Basic
Leadership 2 Laboratory required. 1.00 CU - Credit excluded from full-time calculation.
Explores the dimensions of creative and innovative tactical leadership strategies and styles by
studying historical case studies and engaging in interactive student exercises. Focus is on continued
development of the knowledge of leadership values and attributes through an understanding of rank,
uniform, customs and courtesies.
220. Leadership In Changing Environments. Staff. Corequisite(s): Enrollment in MSCI 202
Leadership I Lab required. 1.00 CU - Credit excluded from full-time calculation.
Examines the challenges of leading in complex contemporary operational environments. Students/
cadets are exposed to more complex land navigation/map reading tasks, as well as more advanced
small unit operations/leadership drills. Cadets develop greater self awareness as they practice
communication and team building skills.
301. Leadership Laboratory/Practicum 3. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of MSCI 100 and
200 level courses. Corequisite(s): Enrollment in MSCI 310 Basic Leadership 3 Lecture required. 2.5
hours. No credit, or as awarded by cross-enrolled schools.
Provides hands-on experience to reinforce leadership fundamentals, while emphasizing increased
awareness of and proficiency in military skills.

Page 2 of 4

MILITARY SCIENCE
(PV) {MSCI}
302. Leadership Laboratory/Practicum. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of MSCI 100 and 200
level courses. Corequisite(s): Enrollment in MSCI 320 Basic Leadership 3 Lecture required. 2.5
hours. No credit, or awarded by cross-enrolled schools.
Provides hands-on experience to reinforce leadership fundamentals, while emphasizing increased
awareness of and proficiency in military skills.
ROTC Advanced Camp. A six-week camp conducted at an Army post. Only openn to (and
required of) students who have completed MS 301 and 302. The student receives pay. Travel, lodging
and most meal cost are defrayed by the US Army. The Advanced Camp environment is highly
structured and demanding, stressing leadership at small unit levels under varying, challenging
conditions. Individual leadership and basic skills performance are evaluated throughout thecamp. The
leaders and skills evaluations at the camp weigh heavily in the subsequent selection process that
determines the type commission and job opportunities given to the student upon graduation from
ROTC and the university
Nurse Summer Training Program. Consist of three weeks at an Advanced Camp (see above) and
up to five weeks serving as a nurse in a military medical treatment facility. Only open to (and required
of) nursing students who have completed MSCI 301 and 302. Replaces normal advanced. The
student receives pay. Travel, lodging and most meal costs are defrayed by the US Army. The camp
and clinical environments are demanding, stressing leadership and basic skills performance are
evaluated throughout. The leadership and skills evaluations weigh heavily un the subsequent
selection process that determines the job opportunities offered to the nurse upon graduation.
310. Leadership in Contact. Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of MSCI 100 and 200 level courses.
Corequisite(s): Enrollment in MSCI 301 Leadership 3 Lab required. 1.00 CU - Credit excluded from
full-time calculation.
Uses increasingly intense situational leadership challenges to build cadet awareness and skills in
leading small units. Skills in decision-making, persuading, and motivating team members when "in
combat" are explored, evaluated, and developed.
320. Complex Team Leadership Issues. (B) Staff. Corequisite(s): Enrollment in MSCI 302
Leadership I Lab required. 1.00 CU - Credit excluded from full-time calculation.
Challenges cadets with more complex leadership issues to further develop, practice, and evaluate
adaptive leadership. Cadets continue to analyze and evaluate their own leadership values, attributes,
skills and actions in preparation for the Leadership Development and Assessment Course (LDAC).
Primary attention is given to preparation for LDAC and the development of both tactical skills and
leadership qualities.
401. Leadership Laboratory/Practicum 4. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of MSCI 100, 200
and 300 level courses. Corequisite(s): Enrollment in MSCI 410 Leadership 4 Lecture required. 1.00
CU - credit excluded from full-time calculation.
Provides hands-on experience to reinforce leadership fundamentals, while emphasizing increased
awareness of and proficiency in military skills.

Page 3 of 4

MILITARY SCIENCE
(PV) {MSCI}
402. Leadership Laboratory/Practicum. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of MSCI 100, 200
and 300 level courses. Corequisite(s): Enrollment in MSCI 420 Basic Leadership 4 Lecture required.
2.5 hours. No credit, or as awarded by cross-enrolled schools.
Provides hands-on experience to reinforce leadership fundamentals, while emphasizing increased
awareness of and proficiency in military skills.
Advance Course Leadership Laboratories. 2h. Open only to students in the associated Military
Science course. Series, with different roles for students at different levels in the program. Involves
leadership responsibilities for the planning, coordination, execution and evaluation of various training
and activities with Basic Course students and for the ROTC program as a whole. Students develop,
practice and refine leadership skills by serving and being evaluated in a variety of resposible
positions.
Advanced Course Physical Fitness. Only offered to (and required of) students in MSCI 301,302,
401 and 402, of which this program is an integral part. Series, with different roles for students at
different levels in the program. Participate in and learn to plan and lead physical fitness programs.
Develops the physical fitness required of an officer in the Army. Emphasis on the development of an
individual fitness program and the role of exercise and fitness in one's life.
410. Developing Adaptive Leaders. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of MSCI 100, 200 and
300 level courses. Corequisite(s): Enrollment in MSCI 401 Leadership 4 Lab required. 1.00 CU credit excluded from full-time calculation.
Develops cadet proficiency in planning, executing, and assessing complex operations, functioning as
a member of a staff, and providing leadership performance feedback to subordinates. Cadets are
given situational opportunities to assess risk, make ethical decisions, and provide coaching to fellow
ROTC cadets.
420. Leadership in the Contemporary Operating Environment of the 21st Century.
Staff.Prerequisite(s): Completion of MSCI 100, 200 and 300 level courses. Corequisite(s): Enrollment
in MSCI 402 Leadership I Lab required. 1.00 CU - Credit excluded from full-time calculation.
Explores the dynamics of leading in the complex situations of current military operations. Cadets
examine differences in customs and courtesies, military law, principles of war, and rules of
engagement in the face of international terrorism. Aspects of interacting with non-government
organizations, civilians on the battlefield, and host nation support are examined and evaluated.

Page 4 of 4

