MASTER OF URBAN SPATIAL ANALYT
(FA) {MUSA}
Urban Spatial Analytics is a graduate major in the department of City and Regional Planning
(CPLN) in the School of Design.
500. (CPLN671) Spatial Statistics and Data Analysis. (A) Eugene Brusilovskiy.
This hands-on course will provide an introduction to statistical methods and will serve as a prequel to
ESE502. Topics covered will include exploratory univariate analysis, correlation and Chi-square
analysis, t-tests and ANOVA. Non-parametric alternatives to the standard tests will be discussed. OLS
regression, including assumptions and diagnostics, will be covered in detail. Heavy emphasis will be
placed on the application of each method covered. The course will conclude with an introduction to
spatial statistical methods and a brief overview of linear algebra and matrix notation for OLS and
spatial regression. Students will learn to use JMP-IN, ArcGIS and GeoDa for data analysis.
501. Introduction to Applied Statistics. (B) Brusilovskiy.
This hands-on course will provide an introduction to statistical methods and will serve as a prequel to
ESE502. Topics covered will include exploratory univariate analysis, correlation and Chi-square
analysis, t-tests and ANOVA. Non-parametric alternatives to the standard tests will be discussed. OLS
regression, including assumptions and diagnostics, will be covered in detail. Heavy emphasis will be
placed on the application of each method covered. The course will conclude with an introduction to
spatial statistical methods and a brief overview of linear algebra and matrix notation for OLS and
spatial regression. Students will learn to use JMP-IN, ArcGIS and GeoDa for data analysis.
502. Web Based Gis. (B)
503. (CPLN503) Modeling Geographical Objects. (A) Tomlin or Hillier.
This course offers a broad and practical introduction to the acquisition, storage,
retrieval,maintenance, use, and presentation of digital cartographic data with vector-oriented (i.e.
drawing based) geographic information systems (GIS) for a variety of environmental science,
planning, and management applications. Previous experience in GIS is not required.
SM 504. Business and Crime Geographics. (B) Amos.Prerequisite(s): Prior experience with
ArcGIS.
In this hands-on course, students will learn how to use ESRI Business Analyst software and data to
undertake real estate and social service market studies, business location studies, and consumer
expenditure profiles. New this year, the course will also explore techniques and software for tracking
and forecasting crime; and deploying police resources.
505. Web-based Mapping. (B) Landis and Dailey.Prerequisite(s): CPLN 670 / LARP 743.
This hands-on course will teach students how to develop and implement web-and internet-based
mapping tools and applications using ESRI's ArcGIS Server and ArcGIS Online products as well as
the GoogleMaps Applications Programming Interface (API). Students will learn how to use web-based
tools to build spatial databases, analyze and display spatial data at multiple scales, mix web-based
vector and raster data with image data, conduct spatial analysis and develop urban and
environmental planning applications.
506. Business and Crime Geographics. (B)

Page 1 of 2

MASTER OF URBAN SPATIAL ANALYT
(FA) {MUSA}
507. (CPLN590) Spatial Analysis for Urban and Environmental Planning. (A) Steif.Prerequisite(s):
MUSA 501 or CPLN 503 or equivalent.
This course builds on prior knowledge of GIS and basic statistics to help students to develop GIS and
spatial analysis applications for use in urban and environmental planning and management. Each
weekly session will focus on a particular analytical approach (e.g., buffering, geo-processing, map
algebra, network analysis) as applied to a particular urban or environmental planning tasks (e.g.,
identification of development opportunities, prioritizing conservation lands, urban growth modeling,
housing price modeling). The format of the class includes weekly lectures/in-class demos; and weekly
homework assignments. The course will make extensive use of ArcGIS and associate Extensions,
especially Spatial Analyst, Network Analyst, and Business Analyst. One-year student versions of
ArcGIS and ArcGIS extensions will be available free of charge at the City Planning Office. ArcGIS
runs best on Windows machines; those with Macs will need to install a Windows emulator.
610. (CPLN690) Javascript Programming for Planning Applications. (B) Faculty.
This course will introduce city planning, MUSA and design graduate students to Java and Javascript.
Students will learn the logic and syntax of the Java programming language for use in simple web
applications (Weeks 1 to 7); as well as how to program database and map-oriented web and desktop
applications using Javascript (Weeks 8 to 14). The "hands-on" uses of Java and Javascript in urban
planning applications will be emphasized. Students will hone their programming and applications
development skills through a series of bi-weekly assignments.
800. MUSA Capstone Project. (C)

Page 2 of 2

