NONPROFIT LEADERSHIP
(SW) {NPLD}

Master of Nonprofit Leadership Courses (NPLD)
510. Social Innovation. (B) Frumkin. Open to graduate and undergraduate students
This is a class focused on understanding how innovation plays a central role in public problem solving.
We will explore how social entrepreneurs develop their ideas, define intended impact, market their
solutions, understand competition, and collaborate with other actors. At the end of the course, students
will have mastered a set of conceptual tools that will allow them to be effective problem solvers in
diverse settings throughout their careers. The course has five core objectives: 1.To introduce students
to the concepts and practices of social entrepreneurship; 2.To introduce students to the components of
a successful social enterprise; 3.To equip students with the tools to be able to accurately identify and
assess innovation and impact in social enterprises; 4.To train students to view the world from a
perspective of social innovation; and 5.To empower students to develop their own innovative solutions
to difficult social problems around the world.
SM 560. Social Media for Social Change. Half credit
Nonprofit organizations have been some of the first adopters of social media tools, and they are
increasingly turning to the use of social media to fulfill a range of communications, outreach, and
marketing needs. This half credit course will introduce students to the importance of understanding the
online space and how it can enhance the work of every nonprofit organization. Students will begin to
develop an understanding and awareness of core platforms and tools along with the importance of
metrics, feedback loops, and taking an iterative approach based on social media best practices.
561. Nonprofit Branding. Rhode. half credit course
This course will provide the tools and framework for helping to understand the role that marketing and
brand building can play in the non-profit sector. As such, we will create a shared understanding of the
key concepts that help define branding and the classic elements of marketing that will serve as a
foundation for discussion and analysis throughout the semester. We will identify the fundamental
differences that non-profit organizations face in building their brands and how those challenges differ
from tradition/for profit brand building. We will identify tools and frameworks that brands/organizations
can use to help design and implement marketing strategy. We will utilize current and relevant case
studies that help demonstrate the core concepts of this course.

Page 1 of 10

NONPROFIT LEADERSHIP
(SW) {NPLD}
562. (Almost) Everything You Need to Know About Nonprofit Law. Kramer.
This half credit course will provide a basic understanding of the law that applies to nonprofit
organizations, with an emphasis on the law affecting 501(c)(3)public charities. It will focus on ways to
obtain and maintain federal tax exempt status, including issues of private inurements and private
benefit, limits on advocacy, lobbying and electioneering, unrelated business income tax, and excess
benefits taxes. It will show how legal structure and governance procedures affect the answer to the
questions "Whose Organization Is It?" Students will review bylaws of multiple organizations to see how
differeces in structure reflect the great diversity of nonprofits and why "one size does not fit all" within
the sector. They will learn how to avoid bad legal drafting that can create problems for dysfunctional
organizations.
The course will explain the fiduciary duty of officers and directors, explore the extent of potential
personal liability, and review necessary insurance and indemnification. It will review Form 990 publicly
available tax returns of multiple nonprofits to see why a tax return may be a nonprofit's most important
public relations document. It will also review the basics of charitable giving through a mock meeting of
university development officers, outline the concepts of planned giving, and discuss the requirements
for charitable solicitation regitration at the state level. It will explain the legal requirements for
maintaining endowments and discuss a series of ethical issues that can face nonprofit executives and
their lawyers.
Students will receive one year of free access to Don Kramer's Nonprofit Issues website, and will
emerge with a better understanding of key legal issues facing the nonprofit sector that regularly make
the news.
563. Raising Philanthropic Capital. Hagin.
Americans gave more than $350 billion to nonprofit organizations last year, the highest total ever
recorded. Now, more than ever, it is crucial that nonprofit leaders master the art and science of raising
philanthropic capital. Participants in this innovative class will: 1) acquire an understanding of the
nonprofit funding landscape; 2) learn proven and creative strategies to secure investments; 3) gain the
experience of giving and motivating charitable commitments; and 4) receive peer evaluation and
professional consulting feedback. This experiential and interactive learning course will provide students
an opportunity to evaluate a nonprofit organization endeavoring to attract voluntary support, and coach
students to think through and develop the ideas, skills, and tools required to participate personally in
today's philanthropic market.
570. Nonprofit Planning & Finance. Burd.
This spring semester financial budgeting course for nonprofit organizations will focus on strategic
issues in nonprofit finance, specifically on capitalization strategies that position nonprofits for greater
impact. The foundation of these goals is understanding and applying appropriate budgeting principles
and best practices in internal organizational systems. Students will have exposure to a varitey of
budgeting scenarios including annual operating budgets and zero-based budgeting, program
profitability, new facility planning, and transformational growth. The class will utilize a variety of
teaching tools: case studies, hands-on budget analysis and development, student applied study with a
nonprofit organization, and guest speakers. This course on financial budgeting is open to all graduate
and professional school students who have a familiarity of the principles of nonprofit finance.

Page 2 of 10

NONPROFIT LEADERSHIP
(SW) {NPLD}
580. Effective Goverance Practices for Nonprofits. (A) Shmavonian. .5 cu course
Effective governance relies upon consistent and ethical board leadership, yet nonprofit organizations
that exemplify truly model governance are few and far between. This course introduces students to
broad frameworks of governance, but will focus most deeply on the human dimensions of board
leadership. In particular, we will examine real examples and cases of moral and ethical dilemmas
faced by nonprofit boards and executive leaders, and the nuanced practices required to achieve
effective board governance. This will involve a careful look at several real cases, as well as guest
lectures from 3-4 different nonprofit board and CEO leaders. The invited leaders will use their own
experiences to guide students through some of the most challenging ethical and managerial situations
that can be encountered, with the goal of providing a practical grounding for students who expect to
contribute to nonprofit leadership in their careers - either as executive staff or as board members.
Fall 2016 class dates: 8/31, 9/12, 9/19, 10/10, 10/24, 11/7; 5:00-8:00PM
581. Effective Governance Practices for Nonprofits. (B) Shmavonian. .5 cu course
Effective governance relies upon consistent and ethical board leadership, yet nonprofit organizations
that exemplify truly model governance are few and far between. This course introduces students to the
broad framework of fiduciary, strategic and generative governance but will focus most deeply on the
human dimensions of board leadership. In particular, we will examine real examples and cases of
moral and ethical dilemmas faced by nonprofit boards and executive leaders, and the nuanced
practice required to achieve effective board governance. This will involve a careful look at several real
cases, as well as guest lectures from 3-4 different nonprofit board and CEO leaders. The invited
leaders will use their own experiences to guide students through some of the most challenging ethical
and managerial situations that can be encountered, with the goal of providing a practical grounding for
students who expect to contribute to nonprofit leadership in their careers - either as executive staff or
as board members. The course will include the review of 4-5 cases, readings, 2-3 brief student
presentations, a team project and one final individual project.
This course complements another half-credit course that was offered in fall 2014 (NPLD 580),
Nonprofit Governing Boards. While there is some continuity between the two semesters (both build
upon the Chait, Ryan, Taylor frameworks set out in Governance as Leadership), each class may be
taken independently as a half-credit course. The spring class offers a deeper, more interactive probe
into the elements of governance that arise in real practice, animated by dynamic nonprofit leaders
sharing their experiences. Each course is targeted toward students who are interested in pursuing
non-profit board or executive leadership roles, and will be coordinated with the Wharton Nonprofit
Board Leadership Program (NBLP).
582. NGOs and International Development. Thompson.
The course will offer a broad perspective on international development, aid, and the roles of NGOs
and social enterprises. The latter half of the course will focus on issues in NGO management:
fundraising, staff (expatriate and local), monitoring, and evaluation (including randomized controlled
trials). The course is aimed at students with no to moderate experience in international development,
but students with extensive work experience with NGOs or development work are also welcome.
This course is organized around two motivating questions: 1) How do we understand the process of
development, and what is the NGO's role to be in it? 2) If NGOs can meaningfully contribute to
development, what are the exemplar and cutting edge practices for NGO management?

Page 3 of 10

NONPROFIT LEADERSHIP
(SW) {NPLD}
587. Building Nonprofits that Thrive. Myers.
This course is designed for interdisciplinary students with an enthusiastic interest in cultivating
flourishing organizations, engaged stakeholders, and inspiring leaders across sectors and especially
within nonprofits. Over the past several years, the field of Positive Organizational Scholarship (POS)
has proliferated, yielding a compelling body of knowledge on how and when people thrive at work. This
course focuses on both the theoretical and practical insights that can be gained from cutting-edge
POS research and applied to help practitioners enrich people's experiences at work. Special attention
is placed on how this widsom applies not only across sectors but also specifically to the nonprofit
organizational context. Key topics of study include: aligning leadership values, motivation and giving
behaviors, facilitation tactics, appreciative inquiry, building high quality connections, job crafting and
meaning at work, real-world application.
In particular, the learning objectives of the course provide students with: 1) Knowledge of cuttingedge POS research and leadership practices; 2) Ability to identify opportunities to use positive
leadership practices in the workplace to enhance stakeholder engagement, individual and
organizational performance, and collective impact; 3) Tools for applying positive leadership concepts in
nonprofits, as well as all other organizational domains (e.g. business, government, coaching, the
family, etc.); 4) Consulting experience with a local non-profit, including group projects of research and
assessment that culminate in presenting to the non-profit organizations strategic recommendations for
future success; 5) Techniques and real-life practice in using positive leadership concepts to enrich
one's own career, relationships, and life.
592. Collaboration across Sectors. (B) Ren.
Across the world, leaders of organizations from business, nonprofit, and government sectors
increasingly recognize the necessity of "working across boundaries" by developing various forms of
collaboration. Collaboration across sectors has become more prevalent, important, and complicated.
This course will help graduate students understand the theory, policy, and practice of across-sector
collaboration. Students will learn the purposes collaborations may serve, the forms they take, what
skills and techniques are required, and the steps involved in initiating, sustaining, and evolving them.
Students will also learn the characteristics of the three sectors, the roles and contributions each can
make to successful collaborations, and the competitive forces that are often at work in the
collaborative processes and their possible implications. The course is open to all graduate students
and sophomore, junior, and senior undergraduates.
589. Ethics and the Pursuit of Social Impact. (A) Handy.
Leaders of organizations must often make difficult decisions that pit the rights of one set of
stakeholders against another. Having multiple stakeholders or bottom-lines brings with it challenges
when conflicts arise, with the perennial question of whose rights/benefits prevail? What trade-offs need
to be made between multiple bottom lines? Does the mission of the organization prevail over the
privileges of employees/clients? To what extent can large donors influence the mission of the
organization? What is an appropriate social return on investment? This course will introduce the
factors that influence moral conduct, the ethical issues that arise when pursuing social goals, and
discuss the best ways to promote ethical conduct within such organizations. The course will use
specific case studies, real and hypothetical, to analyze a variety of ethical issues that arise (including
finance, governance, accountability, fundraising, labor (paid and unpaid), client groups, and service
provision) among the multiple stakeholders. This course is offered in the fall semester and will
conclude by discussing ways that organizations can prevent and correct misconduct, develop a spirit
of ethical behavior and institutionalize ethical values in the organization's culture.

Page 4 of 10

NONPROFIT LEADERSHIP
(SW) {NPLD}
590. (NPLD790) Social Finance. (A) Lamas. The course is open to students across the University. All
graduate students who take this course must register under NPLD 790. All undergraduate students
must register under NPLD 590.
Economic analysis and financial accounting are like languages: fluency comes with practice. In-class
review of case studies (including in-person discussions with the representatives of diverse agencies
and organizations featured in the case studies) will enable students to test and develop their capacity
for applying conceptual tools and analytical methods to sometimes messy and always complicated,
real-life situations.
The course objective is to develop theoretical understanding, critical judgment, and practical skills
for sensitive and effective engagement with financial and economic matters of significance. Students
will learn: (a) different ways of thinking about the economic foundations of social policy, (b) the basic
terminology, tools, and methods for analyzing the financial statements of a wide range of
organizations, and (c) accounting procedures for evaluating business, government, and organizational
operations, policies, and practices.
This course is at once macro and micro in its orientation: It provides a conceptual basis - derived
from mainstream and alternative perspectives - for thinking about the economic dimensions of human
development and social policy, and it introduces a set of core competencies for leadership and
financial management of organizations, including conventional enterprises, consulting firms, research
institutions, governmental agencies, philanthropies, cooperatives, and other third-sector organizations.
591. Change Making: Personal Traits and Professional Skills. (L) Sherman.
Over the past decade, researchers have identified some of the key skills that people need to succeed
in their work and in their lives. These are skills that anyone can develop with practice. In this class, we
will teach three of the key skills: resilience (the ability to thrive in difficult times); creativity (the ability to
come up with innovative solutions to problems); and productivity (the ability to make the best use of
your time and find life balance).
This summer session will take place through dynamic, interactive workshops. During the first
session we will learn the key skills. Over the course of the next three weeks, we will practice these
skills to see significant improvement in important areas of our daily lives. By the final day of class, we
will talk about how to sustain these gains in our personal and professional lives long after the course
has ended.
Summer 2016 meeting times: June 4-5, June 11-12, June 25-26, 10am-5pm
593. Design Thinking for Social Impact. (L) Lidgus.
Thinking like a designer can transform the way people and organizations develop products, services,
processes, and strategy. This approach, called design thinking, brings together what is desirable from
a human point of view with what is technologically feasible and economically viable. It also allows
people who aren't trained as designers to use creative tools to address a vast range of challenges.
Design thinking is a deeply human process that taps into abilities we all have but get overlooked by
more conventional problem-solving practices. It relies on our ability to be intuitive, to recognize
patterns, to construct ideas that are emotionally meaningful as well as functional, and to express
ourselves through means beyond words or symbols.
Sarah Lidgus, a writer and strategist with the design firm IDEO and, formerly the non-profit
IDEO.org, will lead students through an immersive, hands-on class in order to demonstrate the
philosophy and practice of design thinking. Design thinking is something you can learn only by doing,
so we'll get out into the world and tackle a design challenge of our own together. We'll learn how to
research by researching, learn how to prototype by prototyping. At the end of the class you should feel
confident in your abilities to apply design thinking to any challenges you're facing - and to come up
with new ideas and solutions as a result.
Summer 2016 course meeting times: June 9, 10, 17, 9am-5pm; June 18, 10am-6pm; June 24,
9am-1pm.

Page 5 of 10

NONPROFIT LEADERSHIP
(SW) {NPLD}
784. The Nonprofit Sector: Concepts and Theories. (A) Guo.
Can you imagine a world without the vitality and diversity of the nonprofit sector? What would it be
like? Everything from health care to education, from serving the disadvantaged to protecting and
restoring the environment, nonprofit organizations seem to have become an inseparable part of every
aspect of our lives. So often they are taken for granted that we seldom pause and reflect on the roles
and functions of these vital organizations in our community. This course will introduce you to the
various roles that voluntary, philanthropic and nonprofit organizations play in American society. It will
cover the theory, size, scope and functions of the sector from multiple disciplinary perspectives
including historical, political, economic, and social views. The course also has a "hidden agenda." Take
this class to see and discover what this agenda is!
595. Nonprofit Storytelling. (L) Eyerly.
Prospective and ongoing volunteers, donors, and other supporters are motivated by a strong belief in
a nonprofit's mission, confidence in its reputation, and certainty that the organization is using
resources wisely and making a difference. Their belief, confidence and certainty are rooted not only in
what nonprofits do, but how they talk about it. In this class, students will learn why storytelling should
be at the center of nonprofit communications. What are good stories? How are they structured? Where
do you find them and how do you communicate them? Can a nonprofit build a culture of storytelling
among its leaders, staff, and the population it serves? Does telling stories really help nonprofits
advance their missions? We will use current and relevant case studies that help demonstrate the core
concepts of this course.
SM 782. Small Group Processes. Taylor,McGrew,Kaminstein,Jean-Pierre. see website for course
dates/times:
http://www.sp2.upenn.edu/degree-programs/ms-in-nonprofit-leadership/academics/
ourse-schedule/
Studying the behavior of groups and the actions/inactions of people within groups provides a doorway
to deeper understanding of ourselves, our families, our friends, our colleagues, our organizations, and
our communitites. This .5 credit course is designed for Penn Graduate students eager to generate
constructive group processes when chairing a committee, managing a work group, teaching in a
classroom, conducting a support/therapy group or facilitating strategy formulation. It is easy to look
back and see what went right or wrong in a group or when observing what others are doing. But tuning
into and gaining a comprehensive grasp of these processes when they are happening and learning
how to take constructive actions in the here and now when it can have a meaningful impact, requires a
high level of cognitive capability combined with a special form of relational artistry. This weekend
course is an amalgam of experiential activities and energizing ways to internalize the rich concepts
developed during a hundred years of research. Participants are required to be fully present and fully
engaged for the whole weekend, read the equivalent of a book's worth of material, and write an 8page (double spaced) paper. Taught by senior groups instructors, including those who have worked in
the Small Group Process workshop in the Wharton Leadership Ventures.
783. Field Exercise in Social Impact Measurement. Hargro.
The twofold purpose of social impact measurement is to assess and improve the impact of nonprofit
programs, and to inform grantmaking practice and effectiveness. In addition to accounting for funds
spent and reporting on the actual work carried out, social impact measurement is an essential learning
opportunity for grantmaker and grantee. However, choosing an appropriate methodology of
measurement is critical. This course will offer an overview of leading social impact measurement
methodologies and tools, and an impact measurement field exercise. During the field exercise, student
teams will develop an evaluation plan and associated instruments for a local nonprofit using one or
more of the methodologies. Teams will present their evaluation plans and offer recommendations for
implementation. Lectures will be complemented by class time devoted to field exercise team meetings
and off-site field work.

Page 6 of 10

NONPROFIT LEADERSHIP
(SW) {NPLD}
785. Group Dynamics and Organizational Politics. (A) Smith.Prerequisite(s): Enrollment in NPLD
program or permission of the instructor.
This intensely experiential course, offered in the fall semester, is designed for those providing group
and institutional leadership at any level of a human enterprise, managing work groups, serving on
special task forces, chairing committees, teaching in classrooms, conducting support groups,
facilitating groups in clinical settings, etc. Students will focus on two topics: (1) an in-depth
understanding of group dynamics while they are in action, and (2) the organizational relationships
between groups with power, groups that experience themselves as powerless and those caught in the
middle. With group and inter-group relations it is easy to see what went right or wrong in hindsight, or
when observing from a distance, but tuning into these dynamics when caught up in them and taking
constructive actions when it can have a meaningful impact, requires complex cognitive and emotional
processing and use of multiple logics simultaneously. This educational format also explores the
mysteries of counter-intuitive principles, such as "to grow, cut back," and "to strengthen self, augment
other," are examined. The experiential events that are at the center of this learning occur over two full
weekends, one in October and one in November.
791. Leadership: Designing the Future. (A) Smith.
This experiential, highly interactive seminar is for those eager to serve in managerial/leadership
positions of human systems that create/maintain the organizational and fiscal viability of public, nonprofit or private enterprises, including their partnerships. Candidates in all Penn graduate programs are
welcome, whether one's ambition is to generate sustainable livelihoods, renewable energy, wealth,
clean water, viable environments, robotics, or quality services in fields such as education, health care,
AI, or criminal justice. Course Participants are members of decision-making groups that run a
computer-based, data-driven, future-creating, socio-econominc simulation while synchronously
studying the intra and inter-group dynamics inherent in all leadership actions.
Fall 2016 class meetings will be Wednesdays 10/26 and 11/2 from 5:30-8:30pm; Friday 11/4 at 6pm
through Sunday 11/6 to 6pm; Friday 11/11 at 6pm through Sunday 11/13 to 6pm; Wednesday 11/16
from 5:30-8:30pm.
786. Strategic Management and Leadership of Nonprofits. (A) Guo.
This course is designed to introduce students to the fundamental issues in accountability and
governance and the administration and management in nonprofit organizations. Through research and
analysis, students will understand multiple structures of accountability and the various stakeholders in
nonprofits; understand the duties and dynamics of boards of directors in conjunction with other
mechanisms of governance (e.g. chief executive officers, advisory boards, etc.); develop an
understanding of management techniques and leadership skills for enhancing the effectiveness of
nonprofit organizations. Students will be asked to think about the challenges of runningnonprofit
organizations in a comparative context, with cases drawn from both the U.S. and abroad.
The emphasis of this course is on acquiring operational skills. The course is designed for those who
may have had years of experience managing other people and programs in the nonprofit sector but
who want to develop a more systematic mastery of this challenge, as well as students from other
sectors who aspire to a nonprofit leadership role.

Page 7 of 10

NONPROFIT LEADERSHIP
(SW) {NPLD}
787. Leadership for the New Economy. (A) Smith. Permission required; contact program office with
request - adamsaks@sp2.upenn.edu
This course is for individuals whose careers will call upon them to be visionary thinkers, sophisticated
system thinkers and enlightened strategic thinkers. It is for women and men who will take
transformative leadership actions that can be successfully implemented by people and groups at all
levels of organizations and social enterprises. Recent events have shown that established leadership
models need to be revitalized, given the complexities of the contemporary world. Hence this course
emphasizes the skills needed to engage in leadership acts relevant to the 21st century, competencies
centered on building green technologies, creating sustainable energy, preserving the sanctity of water,
fostering environmental-friendly policies, and constructing an economics predicated on principles of
abundance rather than scarcity. Case studies of Lincoln, Gandhi, and Mandela will highlight that many
of the key leadership lessons required for this era were elegantly crafted by these giants of history in
conditions of extreme adversity not unlike the challenges of today. Key topics are decision making
under conditions of uncertainty, building meaningful authority systems, using power creatively,
harnessing the latent potential contained within conflicts and partnering with competitors and
adversaries.
790. (NPLD590) Social Finance. (A) Lamas. The course is open to students across the University. All
graduate students who take this course must register under NPLD 790. All undergraduate students
must register under NPLD 590.
Economic analysis and financial accounting are like languages: fluency comes with practice. In-class
review of case studies (including in-person discussions with the representatives of diverse agencies
and organizations featured in the case studies) will enable students to test and develop their capacity
for applying conceptual tools and analytical methods to sometimes messy and always complicated,
real-life situations.
The course objective is to develop theoretical understanding, critical judgment, and practical skills
for sensitive and effective engagement with financial and economic matters of significance. Students
will learn: (a) different ways of thinking about the economic foundations of social policy, (b) the basic
terminology, tools, and methods for analyzing the financial statements of a wide range of
organizations, and (c) accounting procedures for evaluating business, government, and organizational
operations, policies, and practices.
This course is at once macro and micro in its orientation: It provides a conceptual basis - derived
from mainstream and alternative perspectives - for thinking about the economic dimensions of human
development and social policy, and it introduces a set of core competencies for leadership and
financial management of organizations, including conventional enterprises, consulting firms, research
institutions, governmental agencies, philanthropies, cooperatives, and other third-sector organizations.
SM 797. (URBS404) Philanthropy and the City. (B) Bauer/Goldman.
This course will focus on how urban communities are shaped by the nonprofit sector and the billions of
philanthropic dollars that fuel their work. By bridging theory and practice, the class explores what
dynamics are at play to deliver vital services or programs in healthcare, education, the arts, community
development, and other issues. The course will also focus on these important questions: (1) Whose
responsibility is the public good? How is that responsibility shared by the public, private, and nonprofit
sectors? and (2) Given that responsibility for the public good, which individuals and groups make the
decisions about how to serve the public good? How are these decisions made, and who benefits from
these decisions? Students will consider these questions in an interdisciplinary context that will bring a
historical and philosophical perspective to the examination of the values and institutions that
characterize the contemporary philanthropy and the nonprofit sector.

Page 8 of 10

NONPROFIT LEADERSHIP
(SW) {NPLD}
SM 792. Social Entrepreneurship. (B) Frumkin.
Social entrepreneurs are individuals with innovative vision seeking to accomplish important public
purposes through the creative and aggressive mobilization of people and resources. Using academic
theory and research on social entrepreneurship as a framework, student innovators learn to design,
develop, and lead social change organizations of their own invention. Students turn their passion for
changing the world into concrete plans for launching a venture. Over the course of the semester, we
will cover a broad array of topics associated with social innovation and entrepreneurship, including
defining the problem/opportunity, refining the mission/vision, developing market research and industry
analysis, defining a financial and operating structure, assessing results and progress, and scaling an
enterprise. This course is neutral on sector. Graduate students in any of Penn's graduate and
professional schools who want to create social value through either nonprofit or for-profit ventures are
invited to take the class and develop their ideas. The class will expose students to the process of
getting an organization - regardless of sector - off the ground and running.
While this is a class on innovation and entrepreneurship, students do not need to be committed to
starting a venture upon graduation. The skills and tools contained in the course have wide applicability
in the workplace. Being able to develop a coherent venture plan is great training for anyone who wants
to work in government, philanthropy, or the business sector funding or managing existing
organizations. The course attempts to convey a picture of what a well-considered and well-executed
venture plan looks like with the goal of developing in students an appreciation for clear thinking in the
pursuit of the creation of public value.
Students will work throughout the term on a plan for an organization that they devise, with
assignments spread out throughout the term. Elements of a venture plan will be drafted through
multiple class assignments, and students present formally and informally several times throughout the
semester, receiving feedback from faculty, peers, social entrepreneurs, and invited guests. At the end
of the term, students will assemble all the pieces they have worked on in the class, revise and hone
these elements, and then put them into a coherent venture plan for their organization. This class is
ideal preparation for the Dell Social Innovation Challenge (www.dellchallenge.org), which the instructor
founded and which awards funds to launch new student social ventures. Entry into the Challenge is not
required.
SM 793. Leadership Within & Across Boundaries. (B) Klein.
This spring semester course explores the key elements of individual leadership, team leadership, and
cross sector leadership in a highly participative format. Through a series of individual assignments,
class discussions, exercises, and simulations, students will explore and understand the potential for
acts of leadership at every level (and in every organization) to create wealth and acheive positive
social change. The course is taught by the Executive Director of the Wharton Graduate Leadership
Program and is open to graduate students throughout the university as well as Penn undergraduate
seniors.
In order to create, invoke, and evoke acts of leadership, we must understand ourselves, our teams
and organizations, and our environments. From this integrated understanding, a set of possibilities
emerge that shape the actions necessary to create positive social change. How can we leverage the
abundance of resources available to individuals, teams, organizations, and collective networks? This
course will explore leadership in five modules: individual leadership, team leadership, organizational
leadership, leadership across boundaries, and network leadership. This seminar style survey course
will blend didactic, dialogic, and experiential methods to build an integrated framework for analysis that
identifies and amplifies the opportunities or acts of leadership.

Page 9 of 10

NONPROFIT LEADERSHIP
(SW) {NPLD}
796. Philanthropy and Fundraising Tools for Managers. (B) Heisman. Undergraduates need
permission
This course will review the everyday tools that nonprofit managers and development officers need to
raise funds from individuals and other sources of private philanthropy. Last year, Americans gave
approximately $300 million and 83% of it was from individuals. The fundraising profession has created
a body of knowledge in the past twenty years that can guide effective fundraising programs so that
charitable organizations can support their mission. The sessions will review the theory and practical
techniques that development professionals use every day in large and small organizations including
annual giving, major gifts, planned giving, cultivation of donors, making your case for support, the
Seven Faces of Philanthropy, special events, and prospect research. There will also be discussions of
philanthropic trends and current giving patterns. For those who are interested in nonprofit
administration, these will be critical tools to understand.

Page 10 of 10

