NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
L/R 061. Biologically-Based Chemistry. (A) Lafferty-Della Valle.Prerequisite(s): One year of high
school general chemistry or its equivalent. 0.5 course units
A contextual approach will be used in studying the concepts in General, Organic and Biological
Chemistry that are foundational to an understanding of normal cellular processes. Topics that will be
covered include measurements, atomic structure, bonding, chemical reactions, properties of gases
and liquids, solutions, equilibrium, acids and bases, pH, buffers, nuclear chemistry, nomenclature and
properties of the main organic functional groups, and the structures and function of carbohydrates,
proteins and lipids.
L/R 062. Cell Biology. (A) Hayes, M.; Lafferty-Della Valle. 0.5 course units
This course will include the major topics of cell biology and microbiology that are foundational for an
understanding of normal and pathological cellular processes. Topics will include the study of
prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell structures and functions, the main biological molecules, membrane
transport, cellular communications, the flow of genetic information, cell division, and cellular
metabolism. The context for this course will be the application of cell biology to understanding the
cellular basis of human diseases and the role of genetics and genomics in health and disease
processes.
L/R 063. Microbiology. (A) Johnson.Prerequisite(s): NURS 061; NURS 062. 0.5 course units
This course will focus on the role of microorganisms in human health and infectious diseases. It will
include a description of the main types of microorganisms, how they are identified, their growth
requirements, the role of the immune system in controlling infections, the control of animal parasites
including viruses, bacteria and fungi and host - microbe interactions.
065. Fundamentals of Nutrition. (B) Compher; Dolan; Caspar-Clark.Prerequisite(s): NURS 061;
NURS 062 (or equivalent Science Sequence Courses).
Essentials of normal nutrition and their relationships to the health of individuals and families. These
concepts serve as a basis for the development of an understanding of the therapeutic application of
dietary principles and the nurse's role and responsibility in this facet of patient care.
SM 098. Sexual Health Promotion & Risk Reduction in West Philadelphia: A Seminar on Urban
Campus/Community Norms. (B) Jemmot.Prerequisite(s): Junior or Senior academic standing.
Satisfies Society & Social Structures Sector for Nursing Class of 2012 and Beyond
This course is a unique combination of hands-on research, teaching, and serviceto the West
Philadelphia community. Students research sexual risk behaviors and risk reduction for HIV and FSTI's
in the West Philadelphia community, both on and off Penn's campus, and make concrete
recommendations for interventions to promote sexual health & reduce risks for infection based on their
findings.
This course satisfies the Society & Social Structures Sector for Nursing Class of 2012 and Beyond.
L/R 101. The Nature of Nursing Practice. (A) Kutney-Lee; Brooks-Carthon; Wiltse Nicely. 0.5 course
units
This course facilitates students' ability to conceptualize the experiences of individuals, families,
communities, and populations living with health and illness. It emphasizes the integration of knowledge
from other disciplines and of nursing science as the basis for practice. The course introduces the four
core themes of the undergraduate nursing program: engagement, inquiry, judgment, and voice and
examines how the themes are used to characterize the nature of nursing practice.

Page 1 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
L/R 102. Situating the Practice of Nursing. (B) Kutney-Lee; Brooks-Carthon; Kaufman;
Brewer.Prerequisite(s): NURS 101. 0.5 course units
This course emphasizes not only how nursing is practiced, but also where it is practiced. The course
further explores the four core themes of engagement, inquiry, judgment, and voice as it provides
guided observational experiences in a wide variety of settings. These experiences help the student to
discover what is not known and what is subsequently necessary to know. These experiences also
explore the place of the natural and social sciences and the arts and humanities in nursing practice.
This course also will highlight the relationships between and among members of the interprofessional
team and families and patients. NURS 102 fosters development of the professional role and sets the
stage for life-long learning.
L/R 103. Psychological and Social Diversity in Health and Wellness. (A) Connolly; Lewis, L,;
George.Prerequisite(s): NURS 101. Offered in Summer for Accelerated BSN Program
This course explores and integrates the intersection of psychological, cognitive, and social
development with the lived experiences of individuals, families, and communities across the lifespan in
order to conduct socially contextualized health assessments and health teaching. Extant theories will
be critically analyzed and examined with respect to issues of health care access, health history, health
promotion, and issues of equity and diversity from a life-course perspective. This knowledge will be
synthesized and integrated with the development of the student's communication skills and
interviewing processes necessary to develop socially attuned health history and teaching that promote
psychological well being and healthy lifestyles. Simulated and observational experiences provide
students with opportunities to acquire and apply knowledge necessary for conducting a
comprehensive health history of an individual situated within a diverse community. They also provide
opportunities to develop prioritized health teaching plans in partnership with that individual.
112. Nutrition: Science & Applications. (C) DeJonghe; Hayes. For Non-Nursing Majors
An overview of the scientific foundations of nutrition. The focus is on the functions, food sources and
metabolism of carbohydrate,fat, protein, vitamins and minerals. Effects of deficiency and excess are
discussed and dietary recommendations for disease prevention are emphasized. Current issues and
controversies are highlighted. Students will analyze their own dietary intakes and develop plans for
future actions.
131. Human Anatomy and Physiology - Part A. (B) Scanga.Prerequisite(s): NURS 61 and NURS 62
(or equivalent College Level Chemistry and Biology). 4 h. lec. 2 h. lab. $100 lab fee
The structural and functional organization of the human organism is presented, along with the
fundamentals of developmental anatomy and embryology. Histologic and gross anatomical features of
selected organ systems are related to the physiologic and biochemical mechanisms which enable the
human body to maintain homeostasis in an ever-changing environment.
132. Human Anatomy and Physiology - Part B. (A) Scanga.Prerequisite(s): NURS 131. 4 h. lec. 2 h.
lab. $100 lab fee.
The structural and functional organization of the human organism is presented, along with the
fundementals of developmental anatomy and embtyology. Histologic and gross anatomical features of
each organ system are related to the physiologic and biochemical mechanisms which enable the
human body to maintain homeostasis in an ever-changing environment. Basic concepts of
pathophysiology are introduced and applied to certain clinical disorders.
L/R 159. PATHWAYS TO PRACTICE.

Page 2 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
160. Physical Assessment. (L) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Matriculation in the Accelerated BSN Nursing
Program. For Students in Accelerated BSN Nursing Program Only
This is a laboratory course designed to help beginning nursing students to develop competence in the
process of physical assessment. Students engage in actual practice of physical assessment with
fellow students as their 'patient' subject. A blending of instructor demonstration and supervision of
physical examination practice sessions is used in the learning laboratory setting. Students prepare via
self-learning activities with a variety of supplied resources (readings, videotapes, computer programs)
and have the opportunity to refine their skill though faculty-supervised practice sessions. Procedural
skills that correlate with the presentations of physiologic system assessment are included.
162. Pathophysiology, Pharmacology, and Therapeutics. (A) Boullata.Prerequisite(s): NURS 215.
For Students in Accelerated BSN Nursing Program Only
Pathophysiologic concepts and processes are introduced with major emphasis on commonly occurring
acute and chronic illnesses and their therapeutic interventions. Major classes of drugs that are used to
support organ function are explored. The physiological and pathophysiological rationale for each drug
indication, mechanisms of drug action, individualized dosing implications, and adverse drug events will
be explored for prototypical agents used in the selected cases. The course will enhance the student's
comprehension of the scientific complexity of therapeutic interventions in various conditions and will
build upon the foundational sciences.
163. Integrated Anatomy, Physiology, and Physical Assessment I. (B) Scanga;
Quigley.Prerequisite(s): NURS 061; NURS 062; NURS 063; (or equivalent Science Sequence
Courses). 2.0 course units
This is the first part of a two-semester course designed to provide a comprehensive study of the
structure and function of the human body along with essential embryology and maturational
physiology. Histological and gross anatomical features of selected organ systems are related to the
physiologic and biochemical mechanisms that enable the human body to maintain homeostasis. Within
each system, deviations from normal are considered to situate the student's understanding of health
problems and to foster an appreciation for the complexity of the human organism. Integrated into each
topic are the correlated physical assessment parameters and related procedural skills. Laboratories
exercises and case study analysis provide a contextual base to acquire and use domain-specific
knowledge of concern to the practice of nursing.
225. Pediatric Nursing. (C) Hickerson.Prerequisite(s): NURS 215. Corequisite(s): NURS 235.Clinical
12 hours weekly and 2 hours Simulated Laboratory Weekly
This course considers how nursing influences the health and healing capacities of infants, children,
adolescents and their families. It focuses on the knowledge and skill acquisition needed to care for
these patients at particular moments, across the continuum of care, and through transitions in an
illness experience. It addresses pediatric nursing phenomena of concern and major final common
pathways of pediatric illness from infancy through adolescence using a using a developmental and
systems approach. Emphasis is placed on family-centered care through transitions in the illness and
recovery phases. The course emphasizes clinical reasoning; family centered strategies for optimizing
health and maintaining individuality; promoting optimal developmental, physiological, and
psychological functioning; and enhancing strengths within the context of family. Clinical experiences at
various children's hospitals and simulation experiences provide sufficient opportunities for clinical
reasoning, clinical care and knowledge integration.

Page 3 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
164. Integrated Human Anatomy, Physiology & Physical Assessment II. (A) Scanga;
Quigley.Prerequisite(s): NURS 163. 2.0 course units
This is the second part of a two semester course designed to provide a comprehensive study of the
structure and function of the human body along with essential embryology and maturational
physiology. Histological and gross anatomical features of selected organ systems are related to the
physiologic and biochemical mechanisms that enable the human body to maintain homeostasis. Within
each system, deviations from normal are considered to situate the student's understanding of health
problems and to foster an appreciation for the complexity of the human organism. Integrated
laboratories and case studies provide a contextual base to acquire and use domain-specific
knowledge that includes physical assessment, and procedural.
165. Integrated Pathophysiology, Pharmacology, and Therapeutics. (B) Boullata.Prerequisite(s):
NURS 164 (or Equivalent). 2.0 course units
Pathophysiologic concepts and processes are introduced with major emphasis on commonly occurring
acute and chronic illnesses and their therapeutic interventions. Major classes of drugs that are used to
support organ function are explored. The physiological and pathophysiological rationale for each drug
indication, mechanisms of drug action, individualized dosing implications, and adverse drug events will
be explored for prototypical agents used in the selected cases. The course will enhance the student's
comprehension of the scientific complexity of therapeutic interventions in various conditions and will
build upon the foundational sciences. Additionally the course will provide the student with sufficient
scientific knowledge and skills to prepare administer and monitor drugs and therapies in a safe and
effective manner.
215. Nursing of Women and Infants. (B) Guidera; O'Hare; Hill-O'Neill.Prerequisite(s): NURS 101;
NURS 102; NURS 103; NURS 164 (Traditional) or NURS 106 (Accelerated).
This course emphasizes the child-bearing cycle, and the related issues of maternal and infant
mortality and morbidity. It also explores women and infant's health care and health promotion needs
across the lifespan. It provides a global perspective, and uses the United Nations' Pillars of Safe
Motherhood and World Health Organization's Millennium Development Goals as the vehicles to enable
students to understand the interrelationships among issues of health and health promotion; social,
economic, political and environmental contexts; and the care of women across the lifespan. Clinical
experiences provide opportunities for students to understand the connections between the local and
the global; to use their developing knowledge base to affect the health of women and their infants.
Students will have opportunities for hospital-based care of child-bearing women and their infants. In
addition, community-based experiences with individual women and with groups of women across the
life cycle will be provided in order to enhance teaching, interviewing and assessment skills.
230. Statistics for Research and Measurement. (A) Tulman.
This course examines statistical methods used by scientists in the analysis of research data. The
fundamental theorem for this course is the "square root law" (central limit theorem). Students become
literate in statistical terminology and symbols and knowledgeable of assumptions for statistical tests.
Fundamental statistics include basic theorems and principles, sample, population and data
distributions, measures of central tendency, correlational techniques, and commonly used parametric
and nonparametric statistical tests. Parameters for inferential and descriptive statistics are examined
as the basis for explaining the results from research studies. Students apply chance models in
estimating confidence intervals of percentages and means, and in hypothesis testing. This content is
taught in the context of nursing research and measurement of nursing phenomena. Examination of
research publications enable students to apply their knowledge to reading and understanding data
analyses used in studies. Students evaluate tables and graphs as ways to summarize research
findings. Course content prepares students to examine statistical and clinical significance of research
findings.

Page 4 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
299. Independent Study in Nursing. (C) Prerequisite(s): Permission of instructor and NURS 106.
An opportunity to develop and implement an individual plan of study under faculty guidance.
235. Psychiatric Nursing. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): NURS 215. Corequisite(s): NURS 225.Clinical 12
hours weekly and 2 hours Simulated Laboratory Weekly
This course examines how nursing influences the health and healing capacities of individuals and
families experiencing severe psychiatric distress. It focuses on the knowledge and skill acquisition
needed to care for these patients at particular moments, across the continuum of care, and through
transitions in an illness experience. The course addresses nursing phenomena of concern related the
meanings of an illness experience, the development of healing relationships with or within individuals,
families, and groups, and on the advanced communication strategies needed to engage individual and
families in mental health promotion strategies. It also provides the tools to enable students to construct
effective treatment groups with patients; work groups with disciplinary and inter-professional
colleagues; and to understand the healing dimensions of environments. Clinical and simulation
experiences provide sufficient opportunities for clinical reasoning, clinical care and clinically situated
knowledge integration.
245. Nursing of Young and Middle Aged Adults. (C) Walsh-Brennan.Prerequisite(s): NURS 215.
Corequisite(s): NURS 255.Clinical 12 hours weekly and 2 hours Simulated Laboratory Weekly
This course considers how nursing influences the health and healing capacities of young and middle
aged adults who experience functional status impairments as a result of serious illness or injury. It
focuses on the knowledge and skill acquisition needed to care for these patients at particular
moments, across the continuum of care, and through transitions in an illness experience. It addresses
nursing phenomena of concern, including risk factors for illness or injury, strategies to overcome
barriers and support personal health resources, alleviate suffering and reduce the impact of illness or
injury on the functioning of the person. Content and clinical experiences integrate developmental and
role issues; policy, cultural and ethical considerations. Clinical experiences in acute care hospital units
and simulation experiences provide opportunities for clinical reasoning, clinical care, and knowledge
integration.
255. Nursing of Older Adults. (C) Matura.Prerequisite(s): NURS 215. Corequisite(s): NURS
245.Clinical 12 hours weekly and 2 hours Simulated Laboratory Weekly
This course considers how nursing influences the health and healing capacities of older adults. It
focuses on the knowledge and skill acquisition needed to care for these patients at particular
moments, across the continuum of care, and through transitions in an illness experience. It addresses
nursing phenomena of concern including the unique set of principles and body of knowledge and skills
necessary to the practice of nursing with older adults. Students are provided with the theoretical
background necessary to understand health system issues affecting older adults. Students will attain
the knowledge necessary to complete a comprehensive assessment of the older adult's physical,
functional, psychosocial, and cognitive capacities. Common problems associated with cardiovascular,
respiratory, neurological, musculoskeletal, sensory, and genitourinary systems that affect older adults
will be discussed. In addition, principles of continuity of care, rehabilitation, nutritional and
pharmacodynamic changes, cultural diversity and ethics will be integrated throughout the course.
Clinical experiences in acute care hospitals and simulation experiences provide sufficient
opportunities for clinical reasoning, clinical care, and knowledge integration.
Special emphasis is placed on transitional care for older adults across the health care continuum.

Page 5 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
303. (GSWS303, HSOC332, NURS503) Contemporary Issues in Human Sexuality and Health. (B)
Stevens.
Course content emphasizes theories of sexual development and factors influencing sexual behavior
within the continuum of health and illness. Common sexual practices of people are studied within the
context of lifestyle and situational life crises. Concepts of normal sexual function and dysfunction are
examined. Contemporary sexual issues are explored.
304. Contemporary Issues in Global Women's Health. (B) Im.Prerequisite(s): Nursing Students
must have completed NURS 215. Freshmen and Sophomores need Instructor Permission
This undergraduate elective course will provide an introduction to contemporary issues in global
women's health and multiple theoretical perspectives related to global women's health. This course will
examine and analyze various women's health issues across the globe within historical, social, cultural,
economic, political and environmental contexts. This course will have particular emphasis on intensive
analyses of gender equity and cultural sensitivity issues in providing appropriate and adequate care
for women across the globe.
312. Nutritional Aspects of Disease. (B) Hayes, M.Prerequisite(s): NURS 112.
This course provides an advanced understanding of the role of nutrition in integrated biological
systems. Students will develop a rigorous comprehension of major clinical disorders, including the
underlying pathophysiology and conditions that are affected by nutrition and how optimization of
nutritional variables may modulate these processes. A critical overview of the role of nutrition in
disease prevention, management and treatment, and in health maintenance will be emphasized
throughout the course.
313. (NURS513) Obesity and Society. (A) Compher.
This course will examine obesity from scientific, cultural, psychological, and economic perspectives.
The complex matrix of factors that contribute to obesity and established treatment options will be
explored.
This course satisfies the Society & Social Structures Sector for Nursing Class of 2012 and Beyond.
316. (NURS516) International Nutrition: Political Economy of World Hunger. (B)
Chrzan.Prerequisite(s): Junior-year or higher; at least one background course in nutrition,
anthropology, sociology or economics.
A detailed consideration of the nature, consequences, and causes of hunger and undernutrition
internationally. Approaches are explored to bringing about change, and to formulating and
implementing policies and programs at international, national, and local levels, designed to alleviate
hunger and under-nutrition.

Page 6 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
315. (NURS515) Sociocultural Influences on Health. (B) Wall. Foundational Course for Minor in
Multicultural/Global Health Care
This course is intended for students interested in U.S/Global Healthcare. It includes lectures,
discussions, readings, and written assignments focused on various social, cultural, and economic
factors that impact the health and illness perceptions and behaviors of various ethnic and minority
groups. In particular, it focuses on how culture affects health and disease, and how health and disease
affect culture.
This course takes a critical approach to knowledge development by scrutinizing values, theories,
assumptions, and practices cross culturally. It relies upon a range of interdisciplinary approaches to
analyze how disease is diagnosed, treated, and experienced differently in various cultural contexts. At
the same time, students will have the opportunity to examine and critique cultural assumptions and
theories, the shifting nature of cultures, the situational use of cultural traditions, and the ethnocentrism
of contemporary Western health care. Special attention is given to the influence of race, class, gender,
religious, and spiritual ideas about health and illness.
SM 318. (GSWS318, HSOC341) Race, Gender, Class and the History of American Health Care.
(A) Fairman. For Benjamin Franklin Scholars & Nursing Honors Students.
This multidisciplinary course surveys the history of American health care through the multiple
perspectives of race, gender, and class, and grounds the discussions in contemporary health issues. It
emphasizes the links between the past and present, using not only primary documents but materials
from disciplines such as literature, art, sociology, and feminist studies that relate both closely and
tangentially to the health professions and health care issues. Discussions will surround gender, classbased, ethnic, and racial ideas about the construction of disease, health and illness; the development
of health care institutions; the interplay between religion and science; the experiences of patients and
providers; and the response to disasters and epidemics.
Skills for document analysis and critique are built into the course as is the contextual foundation for
understanding the history of health care. This course satisfies both the Society & Social Structures
and the Histories & Traditions sectors for the Nursing Class of 2012 and beyond.
319. (NURS519) Etiology and Treatment of Contemporary Chronic Diseases in America: Focus
on Obesity and Cancer. (B) Glanz; Jacobs, L.; Sarwer.
This course will focus on two of the major public health problems in the United States-obesity and
cancer. These diseases will be considered from a variety of perspectives: epidemiological,
environmental, physiological and behavioral. In addition, the course will focus on the range of
interventions being developed to treat as well as prevent both diseases.
SM 324. (GSWS324, HSOC324) Children's Health in the United States, 1800-2000. (A) Connolly.
For Benjamin Franklin Scholars & Nursing Honors Students
This course explores the impact of historical ideas, events, and actors pertaining to the history of
children's health care in the United States. Emphasis is placed on tracing the origins and evolution of
issues that have salience for twenty-first century children's health care policy and the delivery of care.
This course satisfies the History & Traditions Sector for Nursing Class of 2012 and Beyond.
330. Theoretical Foundations of Health Care Ethics. (C) Perlman; Ulrich.
The theoretical foundations of health care ethics including definitions of ethics, history of bioethics and
nursing ethics, and the influence of religion,psychology of moral development and philosophy in the
development of ethical theory. Nursing code of ethics, changing ideas in ethics, and discussion of the
developing profession of nursing are included.

Page 7 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
L/R 331. (NURS531) Forensic Mental Health. (A) Brown, K.; Sabella.
Forensic mental health is the interface between the law and mental health. This course examines the
components of human behavior that bring people into a judicial setting. Content will cover: criminal
personalities, forensic interview, and the role of forensic psychiatry. Domestic violence offenders, sex
offenders, stalkers, gang members, and offenders who commit homicide will be discussed. Definitions
and dynamics of criminal motherhood and the psychodynamics of violent juvenile offenders will be
presented. Use of the internet by offenders will also be discussed. This course also offers a field
experience in which student's interview incarcerated individuals.
332. (NURS534) Forensic Science I. (B) Cronin, G..
This course discusses the interface of law and science. Forensic science is theapplication of scientific
principles in the legal arena. This course examines the contribution of forensic science to criminal and
civil investigation. Crime sceanalysis is accomplished via disciplines within forensic science. The role
of tmedical examiner, the structure and function of crime laboratories, death investigation and the role
of health care personnel in forensic cases is discused.
As of Spring 2016, students in the College of Arts and Sciences are not permitted to enroll in this
course.
SM 338. (GSWS338, HSOC338, NURS638, NURS838) "Sweet Little Old Ladies and Sandwiched
Daughters": Social Images and Issues in our Aging Society. (J) Kagan. Third or fourth year
undergraduate students in any major BFS, JWS, and NUHP students
This course is an intensive and focused introduction to social gerontology as a trans-disciplinary lens
through which to examine aspects of social structure, actions, and consequences in an aging society.
A variety of sources are employed to introduce students from any field focused on human behavior
and interaction to classical notions of social gerontology and current scholarly inquiry in gerontology.
Field work in the tradition of thick thickdescription creates a mechanism to engage students in newly
gerontological understandings of their life worlds and daily interactions. Weekly field work, observing
aspects of age and representations of aging and being old in every day experiences forms, is
juxtaposed against close critical readings of classical works in social gerontology and current research
literature as well as viewings of film and readings of popular literature as the basis for student analysis.
Student participation in the seminar demands careful scrutiny and critical synthesis of disparate
intellectual, cultural, and social perspectives using readings and field work and creation of oral and
written arguments that extend understandings of the issues at hand in new and substantive ways.
Emphasis is placed on analysis of field work and literature through a series of media reports and a
final term paper.
Creative approaches to identifying literature, analyzing field work and representing critique are
encouraged. This course satisfies the Society & Social Structures Sector for Nursing Class of 2012
and Beyond.
333. (NURS533) Victimology. (C) Cronin G.
This course examines the wide range of victimization experiences from the perspective of the victim,
their families and society. Crimes to be studied include workplace violence, corporate crime, robbery,
burglary, assault, rape, stalking, domestic violence, homicide, suicide, elderly abuse and child sexual
abuse and exploitation. The role of the medical examiner, health care providers and the FBI as they
relate to victims of crime will be discussed. Emphasis will be given to exploring the elements of each
crime and response patterns to victimizations. Services available to victims of crime will be discussed.
As of Spring 2016, students in the College of Arts and Sciences are not permitted to enroll in this
course.

Page 8 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
L/R 334. (NURS540) Public Policy and the Nation's Health. (B) Sochalski.
This course examines health care and social policy from domestic and international perspectives. It is
designed to engage undergraduate students in critical thinking about health policy issues as they
affect our health care, employment, taxes, and social investments. The current national debate on
health care reform is used as a frame of reference for examining the strengths and weaknesses of
health care services in the U.S. from the perspectives of patients/families, health professionals, health
services providers, insurers, employers, and public policy makers, and the pros and cons of a range of
prescriptions for system improvement from across the political spectrum. About a third of the course
focuses more specifically on global public health challenges and the policy strategies for reducing
health disparities worldwide.
336. (NURS536) Current Topics in Pain. (A) Polomano.Prerequisite(s): Junior or senior status in the
nursing curriculum or by permission of the instructor.
This course focuses on biopsychosocial aspects of the pain experience and interpatient differences
and how these form the basis for understanding pain perception, physiological and behavioral
reactions and response to pain interventions. Content includes an integrated overview of the
neurobiology of pain, measurement pain, pharmacological and nonpharmacological approaches for
acute and chronic pain syndromes, health policy and care delivery models for improving pain
assessment and management. Peripheral processing, neuroanatomical pathways and central
integrating mechanisms involved in nociception and pain are examined. The roles of individual
biochemical mediators, neurotransmitters and neuromodulators are examined and linked to
theeffectiveness of pharmacological and alternative methods for pain control. The challenges of pain
assessment and pain management in special clinical populations are considered. Relevant topics of
special interest to course participants will be introduced for class discussion in the form of student
presentations.
SM 339. (GSWS339, HSOC339) "Aging, Beauty, and Sexuality": Psychological Gerontology in
the 21st Century. (K) Kagan. Third or fourth year undergraduate students in any major BFS, JWS,
and NUHP students
This honors course examines the psychological gerontology of advancing age and identity in the 21st
century. Examination emphasizes gendered notions of beauty and sexuality in ageing and the life span
to foster discourse around historical notions and images of beauty and ugliness in late life in contrast
to contemporary messages of attractiveness and age represented by both women and men. The
course is designed to create intellectual foundations as place from which to critique socially mediated
and personally conveyed images and messages from a variety of media and their influence on
intrapersonal and interpersonal constructions and social processes. Contemporary and historical
ideas encompassing stereotypical and idealized views of the older person are employed to reflect
dialogue around readings and field work.
Classical and contemporary scholarship from gerontology, anthropology, biomedicine and surgery,
nursing, and marketing among other disciplines as well as select lay literature are critiqued and
compared with interpretation of field work to build understandings of diverse individual, familial, and
cultural impressions of aging and identity. Skills for participant observer field work in the tradition of
thick description are built to allow reflection and analysis of discourse about aging, beauty, sexuality,
and other relevant aspects of human identity. This course satisfies the Society & Social Structures
Sector for Nursing Class of 2012 and Beyond.
SM 343. Global Engagement Seminar Environmental Health issues.

Page 9 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
358. Case Study: Nurses and the Child Welfare System. (A) Connolly.Prerequisite(s): NURS 165;
NURS 215.
Building on knowledge and skill acquired through undergraduate nursing courses, this case study
offers nursing majors an in depth and interprofessional opportunity to study research, policy, and
practice-based issues in children and families involved with the child welfare system. Special emphasis
is placed on the role of the nurse in the child welfare system. Fieldwork experiences will enable
students to gain practical experience regarding the needs of children and families with an emphasis on
a consideration of how to achieve partnership and create alliances with parents and youngsters.
344. (NURS544) Etiology and Treatment of Contemporary Chronic Diseases in America: Focus
on Obesity and Cancer. (B) Glanz; Sarwer; Jacobs, L..
This course will focus on two of the major public health problems in the United States - obesity and
cancer. These diseases will be considered from a variety of perspectives: epidemiological,
environmental, physiological and behavioral. In addition, the course will focus on the range of
interventions being developed to treat as well as prevent both diseases.
355. Case Study: Self-care of Chronic Illness. (B) Riegel.Prerequisite(s): NURS 215. 2 hour
seminar; 1 hour fieldwork / week
This case study introduces the role of self-care by patients with chronic illness. We will discuss the
history, definitions, predictors, and outcomes of self-care in various chronically ill populations. A focus
of discussion will be an in depth exploration of the factors that influence self-care. Understanding these
factors will prepare nurses for their role in promoting patient self-care. Fieldwork experiences will
enable students to gain practical experience in engaging chronically ill individuals in self-care.
356. Case Study: Culture of Birth. (B) McCool.Prerequisite(s): NURS 215, 225 or Permission of
Instructor.
This course will explore the cultural context of birth and the activities of women and professionals and/
or attendants in meeting the health care needs of pregnant women. The history of caring for women at
birth, international health care, cultural mores/societal values, place of birth, psychosocial factors,
ethical decision-making and the role of technology are content areas that will be discussed.
359. Case Study: Quality Care Challenges in an Evolving Health Care Market. (B) Pinola;
Sparrow.Prerequisite(s): NURS 104, 106.
Quality care is an issue for consumers, providers, purchasers, and policy makers. This case study
examines the multiple challenges that surround the quality of health care in the evolving United States
health care marketplace. Through classroom discussion and special project experience, the student
will become familiar with the concept of health care quality and approaches to the measurement and
management of quality. Using Donabedian's construct of structure, process and outcomes, strategies
to improve quality while containing or reducing costs are reviewed, including the contributions of
clinical practice guidelines. The evolving dominant structures for providing health care services,
managed care and integrated delivery systems, and their approaches to quality management and
reporting will be explored.
360. Case Study: Nursing Practice with HIV+ Patients. (A) Vincent.Prerequisite(s): NURS 104, 106.
This course is directed at the need to increase nursing majors knowledge and clinical expertice in the
care of persons with HIV/AIDS. Hands on clinical practice with nurses who are AIDS experts will be
combined with seminars that provide epidemiologic, clinical assessment, infection control, symptom
management, patient teaching, psychosocial, ethical, cultural, political, and policy information.

Page 10 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
361. Case Study: Breast Feeding & Human Lactation. (A) Spatz.Prerequisite(s): NURS 104, 106.
Human milk is recognized universally as the optimal diet for newborn infants. The health benefits of
breastfeeding are so significant that a National Health Objective set forth by the Surgeon General of
the United States for the year 2010 is to increase the proportion of mothers who breastfeed their
babies in the postpartum period. Through classroom and clinical experiences, this course will provide
an in depth examination of the anatomy and physiology of lactation, essential aspects of establishing
and maintaining lactation, and the nurses' role in counseling the breastfeeding family. Emphasis will be
placed on current research findings in the content area.
363. Case Study: Aggressive Behavior in Healthcare: Assessment Prevention and Treatment.
(B) Coleman.Prerequisite(s): NURS 104, 106.
The escalating incidence and prevalence of aggression in the health care setting requires that
providers acquire a new set of pragmatic competencies for managing its complex sequelae. This
course presents theoretical frameworks for understanding, predicting, preventing and responding to
aggressive behaviors across the life span. Historical, bio-behavioral, social, and cultural explanations
for aggression will be synthesized and analyzed within the context of multiple points of entry into the
health care system across clinical settings. Personal self-awareness, debriefing, and stress
management techniques exemplify techniques to prevent untoward consequences in providers. This
course also uses exemplars and a range of experiential learning strategies, including skill
development, situation analysis, concept mapping, unfolding case studies and cooperative learning, to
examine the assessment, prevention, treatment, and response to aggressive behavior in patients and
management of its consequences in self and others.
364. Case Study: Cancer. (B) Hollis.Prerequisite(s): NURS 104, 106.
This elective case study offers students the opportunity to learn about the etiology, diagnosis, and
management of cancer across the lifespan. Building on existing clinical knowledge and skills, students
will explore cancer care from the perspectives of prevention, early detection, treatment, survivorship,
and death. Observational clinical experiences and selected case studies will enhance students'
understanding of patients' and families' cancer experience.
368. (NURS550) Case Study: Home Health Care. (A) Doyle.Prerequisite(s): NURS 104, NURS 106.
This course examines the major aspects of home-based care across patients' life spans from acute to
long term care. New trends, advances, and issues in home management of complex conditions,
innovative delivery systems and legal, ethical and policy consideration will be explored.
365. Case Study: Case Analysis in Clinical Nutrition. (B) Dolan.Prerequisite(s): NURS 104, 106.
This course is designed for present and future nurse professionals who wish to increase their
knowledge of nutrition and expertise and application of knowledge to achieve optimal health of clients
and themselves. Principles of medical nutrition therapy in health care delivery are emphasized in
periods of physiologic stress and metabolic alterations. Individual nutrient requirements are considered
from pathophysiologic and iatrogenic influences on nutritional status. Nutritional considerations for
disease states will be explored through epidemiological, prevalence, incidence, treatment and
research data. Understanding application of medical nutrition therapy are included through case
analysis and field experiences

Page 11 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
366. (NURS566) Case Study: Living with Dementia. (M) Strumpf; Kagan; Cotter.Prerequisite(s):
NURS 104, 106 or Permission from Instructor.
Living with Dementia provides a two fold experience: guided observation of an individual with
dementia and a seminar series on dementia - neuropathology, assessment, care and treatment.
Students will interact with a person with AD and his/her caregiver. The goal is to understand the
demented individual's functional abilities and impact of environment on performance and behavior. A
further goal is to develop an appreciation of the primary caregiver's role and the strengths and
limitations of community support systems. Each team of two to three will be assigned a family unit for
study. In so far as possible, teams will be interdisciplinary.
367. (NURS557) Case Study: Principles of Palliative Care. (A) Ersek.Prerequisite(s): NURS 104,
NURS 106.
This course prepares students to collaborate effectively with an interdisciplinary team in assessing
patients and families, and planning and evaluating palliative and end of life care for diverse populations
with progressive illness in multiple health care settings. Course content and assignments focus on the
nurse's role in addressing the complex assessment and responses to the psychosocial and spiritual
concerns of patients and caregivers across the trajectory of advanced illness.
375. Nutrition Throughout The Life Cycle. (I) Berman-Levine.Prerequisite(s): NURS 54, or NURS
112, comparable nutrition course, or approved introductory course.
Understanding and meeting nutritional needs from conception through adulthood will be addressed.
Nutrition-related concerns at each stage of the lifecycle, including impact of lifestyle, education,
economics and food behavior will be explored.
376. Issues in Nutrition, Exercise, and Fitness. (B) Compher; Dougherty.
An examination of the scientific basis for the relationship between nutrition, exercise and fitness. The
principles of exercise science and their interaction with nutrition are explored in depth. The
physiological and biochemical effects of training are examined in relation to sports performance and
prevention of the chronic diseases prevalent in developed countries.
380. Nursing in the Community. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): NURS 225; NURS 235; NURS 245; NURS
255. Clinical 16 hours Weekly and 2 hours Simulated Laboratory Weekly Also Offered Summer
Session (12 Weeks)
This course considers how nursing influences the health and healing capacities of both communities
as a whole (populations) and of groups, families, and individuals living within particular communities
locally and globally. It addresses the complexity of nursing practice using a public health paradigm. It
requires students to draw from prior class and clinical knowledge and skills and apply this practice
base to communities across care settings, ages, and cultures with different experiences of equity and
access to care. It provides the tools needed to engage in collaborative community work and to give
voice to the community's strengths, needs, and goals. It also moves students from an individual and
family focus to a population focus for health assessment and intervention. Students consider the
science, policies, and resources that support public health, and community based and communityoriented care. Clinical and simulated experiences in community settings provide sufficient
opportunities for clinical reasoning, clinical care and knowledge integration in community settings.
Students will have opportunities to care for patients and populations within selected communities.

Page 12 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
SM 386. Nursing Honors Research Project. (M) Kagan; McCauley, K.Prerequisite(s): NURS 260 or
NURS 637, NURS 385H. Enrollment in Nursing Undergraduate Honors Program Required
This course is an advanced seminar for research and scholarship to be taken by honors students in
nursing. Enrollment is concurrent with implementation of the individual student's honors project.
Practical considerations in carrying out such a project, including scholarly approach and scientific
integrity as well as scholarly writing and dissemination will be discussed and illustrated, using
exemplars and student projects. The various phases of students' projects will be used as launching
points for discussions and to complement students' work with their faculty supervisors. Paths and
planning for careers in nursing and related disciplines and the idea of scholarship and research
trajectories will be developed throughout the course.
389. Research/Inquiry-Based Service Residency. (C) Curley; Leary, M..Prerequisite(s): NURS 547.
0.5 course units
This course is designed to facilitate students' intellectual curiosity and independence in exploring the
research process relevant to an area of interest. Students expand their research knowledge base
provided in NURS 230 and NURS 547 through a structured individualized faculty mentored experience
based on specific learning objectives. Students identify a faculty advisor and, in collaboration with the
advisor, define learning objectives to guide a plan of study. All research or inquiry residencies are
under the guidance of a faculty member in the School of Nursing, but students may also interact with
affiliated investigators and clinicians who contribute to and enrich the course. The residency offers
students opportunities to experience at any level systematic methods for research, or service-based
clinical inquiry or quality improvement.
This mentored residency can be fulfilled by one of the following options: * Research-based
practicum in basic science, clinical research, nursing history, healthcare policy, ethics, or informatics. *
Inquiry-based Service practicum such as conducting quality improvement procedures or program
evaluations in an affiliated healthcare institution. * Taking one of the University's Academically Based
Community Service (ABCS) courses with prior approval by the Steering Committee. * Individualized
study abroad experience with prior approval by the Steering Committee.
390. Leadership in the Complex Healthcare System. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): NURS 380. Clinical
16 hours Weekly and 2 hours Simulated Laboratory Weekly
This two-part course provides the didactic and clinical experiences in increasingly complex nursing
care situations and environments which facilitate the students' transition to independent practice. In
the lecture component, the focus is on the integration of knowledge and skill for nursing practice and
develops the ability of students to see nursing practice as part of a complex system. It examines
systems thinking and complexity, development of a leadership role and skills, inter-professional
communication and teamwork, and leading change in healthcare organizations. This course also
examines the nurse's role in improvement science and patient care delivery, focusing on quality
improvement processes, patient safety, nurse sensitive process and outcome metrics with microsystems. This course also allows students to develop the capacity for clinical expertise, leadership,
and for translating the science of the profession into practice. Students also are assigned to a seminar
component that is correlated with their selected site for the specialty clinical practicum. This aspect of
the course allows the student to develop additional expertise in a specialty area of practice and to
develop competences specific to that population of patients.
These seminar components are adult health and illness; adult critical care, obstetrics/labor &
delivery, psychiatric/mental health, and pediatrics. Advanced simulation experiences and extensive
clinical practice in an area of the students' choice provide multiple opportunities to synthesize the
multidimensional aspects of nursing, and provide the environment which facilitates transition to
professional nursing practice. Students select from a variety of settings in which to refine their practice
skills. Principles of leadership, accountability and change will be applied to clinical practice as the
student begins to operationalize the professional nursing role. Emphasis is placed on the nurse as a
knowledgeable provider of health care who is both a change agent and advocate.

Page 13 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
399. Faculty Directed Research Practicum. (C) Prerequisite(s): Permission of instructor and
completion of a research course (NURS 260 or NURS 637).
SM 400. Advances In Health Systems Research And Analysis. (K) Sochalski; McHugh, M. by
Permission Only
Capstone Course for NURS/WH Joint Degree Students.
500. (PUBH502) Introduction to Principles and Methods of Epidemiology. (B)
Schmitz.Prerequisite(s): Elementary statistics.
This course provides an introduction to epidemiologic methods and overview of the role of
epidemiology in studies of disease etiology and in the planning, delivery and evaluation of health
services. The population-based approach to the collection and analysis of health data will be
emphasized throughout the course. Through textbook reading, problems sets, class discussion and
review o the recent literature, students will become acquainted with the basic designs of epidemiologic
studies in theory and in practice. Students will develop the basic skills necessary to use epidemiologic
knowledge and methods as the basis for scientific public health practice.
503. (GSWS303, HSOC332, NURS303) Contemporary Issues in Human Sexuality and Health. (B)
Guidera; Villari. Junior and Senior undergraduates. Open to all graduate students
Emphasizes the theories of sexual development and sexual behavior within the continuum of health
and disease. Common sexual practices of people are studied in relation to life-style and/or situational
life crisis. Contemporary issues in sexuality and health will be examined.
This course satisfies the Society & Social Structures Sector for Nursing Class of 2012 and Beyond.
509. The Medically Fragile Child. (L) Deatrick. Summer Session II
This course is designed to assist prospective practitioners develop advanced skills in identifying the
needs and interventions for medically fragile neonataes, children and their families.
511. Loss, Grief and Bereavement. (L) Sabella. Summer Session II
Loss, grief and bereavement are pervasive aspects of the human experience. The content of this
course provides a basis both for personal development and professional growth. Through a series of
seminars, key issues surrounding loss, death, dying, grief and bereavement will be examined.
516. (NURS316) International Nutrition: Political Economy of World Hunger. (B) Chrzan. Graduate
Students Only
A detailed consideration of the nature, consequences, and causes of hunger and undernutrition
internationally. Approaches are explored to bringing about change, and to formulating and
implementing policies and programs at international, national, and local levels, designed to alleviate
hunger and under-nutrition.
This course satisfies the Society & Social Structures Sector for Nursing Class of 2012 and Beyond.
513. (NURS313) Obesity and Society. (A) Compher.Prerequisite(s): Undegraduates by permission of
instructor.
This course will examine obesity from scientific, cultural, psychological, and economic perspectives.
The complex matrix of factors that contribute to obesity and established treatment options will be
explored.
This course satisfies the Society & Social Structures Sector for Nursing Class of 2012 and Beyond.

Page 14 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
515. (NURS315) Sociocultural Influences on Health. (B) Wall.
This course is intended for students interested in U.S/Global Healthcare. It includes lectures,
discussions, readings, and written assignments focused on various social, cultural, and economic
factors that impact the health and illness perceptions and behaviors of various ethnic and minority
groups. In particular, it focuses on how culture affects health and disease, and how health and disease
affect culture.
This course takes a critical approach to knowledge development by scrutinizing values, theories,
assumptions, and practices cross culturally. It relies upon a range of interdisciplinary approaches to
analyze how disease is diagnosed, treated, and experienced differently in various cultural contexts. At
the same time, students will have the opportunity to examine and critique cultural assumptions and
theories, the shifting nature of cultures, the situational use of cultural traditions, and the ethnocentrism
of contemporary Western health care. Special attention is given to the influence of race, class, gender,
religious, and spiritual ideas about health and illness.
517. Advanced Nutrition and Metabolism. (B) Compher.Prerequisite(s): Nurs 54 or Nurs 112
(Students with extensive background in life sciences by permission of faculty).
Essentials of nutritional biochemistry from the molecular level to the level of the whole human
organism. Nutrient functions and inter-relationshps are explored with attention to the association
between nutrients and disease risk. Topics include energy metabolism and regulation of fat storage,
new functions of vitamins and minerals, gene nutrient interactions and current research topics.
518. (GSWS518) Nursing and the Gendering of Health Care in the United States and
Internationally, 1860-2000. (B) Wall.
This course examines changing ideas about the nature of health and illness; changing forms of health
care delivery; changing experiences of women as providers and patients; changing role expectations
and realities for nurses; changing midwifery practice; and changing segmentation of the health care
labor market by gender, class and race. It takes a gender perspective on all topics considered in the
course. A comparative approach is used as national and international literature is considered. This
focus is presented as one way of understanding the complex interrelationships among gender, class,
and race in health care systems of the United States and countries abroad.
519. (NURS319) Etiology and Treatment of Contemporary Chronic Diseases in America: Focus
on Obesity and Cancer. (A) Glanz; Jacobs, L.; Sarwer.
This course will focus on two of the major public health problems in the United States-obesity and
cancer. These diseases will be considered from a variety of perspectives: epidemiological,
environmental, physiological and behavioral. In addition, the course will focus on the range of
interventions being developed to treat as well as prevent both diseases.
SM 521. Current Topics in Nutrition. (M) Compher.
The objective of the course is to integrate the nutrition knowledge obtained from previous course work
in nutrition and provide the student the opportunity to explore, analyze and formulate implications of
the research and related literature on a self-selected topic under the guidance of the faculty
coordinator. Current topics and controversies in nutrition will be discussed weekly. Readings will be
assigned in coordination with each discussion topic and students will be required to seek out other
sources of information to add to the class discussion. Topics will change from year to year to reflect the
most recent interests and issues.

Page 15 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
523. Advanced Nutrition: Molecular Basis of Nutrition. Prerequisite(s): NURS 065 or 112.
Essentials of nutritional biochemistry of macronutrient (protein, carbohydrate,lipid) metabolism from
the molecular level to the level of the whole human organism. Linkages between energy and nitrogen
balance and states of health anddisease are examined. Topics include energy metabolic pathways,
nutrient transportation, nutrient catabolism, nutrient anabolism, body composition, and biomarkers.
524. Advanced Human Nutrition and Micronutrient Metabolism. Prerequisite(s): NURS 605 or
NURS 112 or Special Permission. Essentials of vitamin and mineral digestion, absorption,
metabolism, and function in humans during states of health and disease are examined. Linkages
between key vitamins and their function in biological systems, such as bone health, energy
metabolism, hematopoetic function, and immune function, are explored in depth. Topics include
pertinent research methodologies, biomarkers,deficiency and toxicity states, and requirements across
the life cycle.
532. Cognitive Behavior Strategies in Health Care. (B) Kuehlwein.
Cognitive therapy will be studied as it has been adapted to treat a broad spectrum of clinical disorders
including depression, anxiety, phobias, substance, obesity, marital problems, sexual dysfunction, and
psychosomatic disorders. Students will have an opportunity to study and observe the crucial link
between thoughts and emotions and the sense of competency patients can develop through self-help
techniques. The course utilizes didactic, experiential and observational techniques.
525. Ethical Aspects of Health and Technology. (B) Ulrich.
Interdisciplinary approach to the study of the interface between ethics and law in the provision of
health and illness care. This course draws upon the disciplines of philosophy, law, biomedical
engineering and nursing in examining such concepts as the use/nonuse of biomedical technology,
who and how one decides what shall be done for a given "patient," and the "rights" and responsibilities
(accountability) of all persons involved in health/illness care decisions. The interplay of ethical theory,
personal value systems, law and technology will be stressed throughout. Lectures, seminars and case
studies will be used.
This course satisfies the Society & Social Structures Sector for Nursing Class of 2012 and Beyond.
526. Child and Adolescent Mental Health. (A) Brawner.Prerequisite(s): Matriculation in a MSN
Program or permission of instructors. Priority will be given to Psychiatric Mental Health NP students
This course is designed to prepare advanced practice registered nurses to address mental health
concerns of children, adolescents and their families from a bio-psycho-socio-cultural perspective.
Prevention, assessment, and treatment of psychiatric disorders affecting children and adolescents in a
variety of settings will be presented in the context of mental health, school and primary health care
delivery systems. Students will explore both pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic treatment
strategies, as well as methods to identify and implement evidence-based practice in child and
adolescent populations. Mental health policy, as well as the unique needs of special populations (e.g.,
youth in the juvenile justice system) will also be discussed.
L/R 531. (NURS331) Forensic Mental Health. (A) Brown, K..
Forensic mental health is the interface between the law and mental health. This course examines the
components of human behavior that bring people into a judicial setting. Content will cover: criminal
personalities, forensic interview, and the role of forensic psychiatry. Domestic violence offenders, sex
offenders, stalkers, gang members, and offenders who commit homicide will be discussed. Definitions
and dynamics of criminal motherhood and the psychodynamics of violent juvenile offenders will be
presented. Use of the internet by offenders will also be discussed. This course also offers a field
experience in which student's interview incarcerated individuals.

Page 16 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
533. (NURS333) Victimology. (C) Cronin, G.. Offered Fall, Spring & Summer I
This course examines the wide range of victimization experiences from the perspective of the victim,
their families and society. Crimes to be studied include workplace violence, corporate crime, robbery,
burglary, assault, rape, stalking, domestic violence, homicide, suicide, elderly abuse and child sexual
abuse and exploitation. The role of the medical examiner, health care providers and the FBI as they
relate to victims of crime will be discussed. Emphasis will be given to exploring the elements of each
crime and response patterns to victimizations. Services available to victims of crime will be discussed.
As of Spring 2016, students in the College of Arts and Sciences are not permitted to enroll in this
course.
534. (NURS332) Forensic Science I. (B) Cronin, G..
This course discusses the interface of law and science. Forensic science is theapplication of scientific
principles in the legal arena. This course examines the contribution of forensic science to criminal and
civil investigation. Crime sceanalysis is accomplished via disciplines within forensic science. The role
of tmedical examiner, the structure and function of crime laboratories, death investigation and the role
of health care personnel in forensic cases is discused.
As of Spring 2016, students in the College of Arts and Sciences are not permitted to enroll in this
course.
535. Comparing Health Care Systems in an Intercultural Context: Study Abroad. (B) Kagan;
Stringer; Muecke.Prerequisite(s): Permission of instructor. Seminar held in Spring, study abroad field
experience held intra-session
This course offers students an opportunity to: 1) expand their knowledge base in health care systems;
2) develop intercultural competency skills and 3) shape a conceptual framework for improving the
quality of health care for the individual, the family, the community and society at large. Emphasizes the
relational, contextual nature of health care and the inseparability of the notions of the health of
individuals and the health of family, society, and culture. Includes field experience.
L/R 540. (NURS334) Current Issues In Health and Social Policy. (L) Sochalski; McHugh, M.
Analysis of key contemporary issues in health and social policy that will provide students with a
deeper understanding of the design and structure of the U.S. health care system, the policy initiatives
that have shaped it, and the roles of the government, the private sector, and consumers and advocacy
groups in setting the policy agenda. Seminars will examine the origins of each issue, the policies
enacted and their effects, both intended and unintended, and will propose and debate the merits of
alternative policy solutions. The role of health services and policy research in informing the policy
debate and directions will be highlighted.
This course satisfies the Society & Social Structures Sector for Nursing Class of 2012 and Beyond.
548. Negotiations in Healthcare. (A) Burke, K.;.Prerequisite(s): Undergraduates must have
permission of instructor.
This course examines the process that leads to change in health care settings and situations.
Students will develop skills that lead to effective negotiations in interpersonal and organizational
settings. Included in the discussion are: concepts of organizational structure and power, negotiating in
difficult situations, and the role of the health care professional in negotiation and change. The course
also examines techniques leading to successful implementation of negotiated change in the practice
setting.
This course satisfies the Society & Social Structures Sector for Nursing Class of 2012 and Beyond.

Page 17 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
544. (NURS344) Etiology and Treatment of Contemporary Chronic Diseases in America: Focus
on Obesity and Cancer. (B) Glanz; Sarwer; Jacobs, L..
This course will focus on two of the major public health problems in the United States - obesity and
cancer. These diseases will be considered from a variety of perspectives: epidemiological,
environmental, physiological and behavioral. In addition, the course will focus on the range of
interventions being developed to treat as well as prevent both diseases.
545. Maternal and Infant Care in the Americas. (B) Guidera; Durain. Registration By Permission of
Instructor
This clinical elective will provide an intensive historical, sociopolitical, and cultural perspective of health
and health care delivery in the Americas with a special emphasis on Latin America and the Caribbean.
Classroom, direct clinical care and field experiences are designed to provide students with a broad
view of the history and culture system of the country of focus. The delivery of health care to women
and children will be explored from a sociopolitical, cultural and historical context. Service learning
experiences are an integral component of this course. The course includes 5 seminars on campus and
10-14 days on site in the country of focus. The country of focus may vary each semester.
547. Scientific Inquiry for Evidence-based Practice. (C) Spatz; Kutney-Lee; Polomano.Prerequisite
(s): NURS 230.
This course is designed to advance students' understanding of the research process, methods of
scientific inquiry, and analytical techniques. Students acquire knowledge of systematic approaches
used by scientists to design and conduct studies. Course content prepares students to appraise
quantitative and qualitative research, and evaluate the scientific merit and clinical significance of
research for translation into practice. Evidence-based guidelines are examined and rated for strength
of evidence and expert consensus using evidence grading systems and defined criteria. Students
engage in variety of creative learning experiences to facilitate appreciative inquiry, clinical reasoning,
and evidence-based practice. Quality improvement, comparative effectiveness analyses, information
science, and electronic health systems technology demonstrate the capacity for measurement and
surveillance of nursing-sensitive and other outcomes used to evaluate quality nursing care and test
interventions. Ethical, legal and health policy implications for research are explored. This course
serves as the basis for scientific inquiry about human experiences to address important problems that
require solutions and to expand the research and the evidence base for professional nursing practice.
550. (NURS368) Home Health Care Concepts: Mgmt. & Delivery of Community-Based Care. (A)
Doyle.
This course examines the major aspects of home-based care across patients' life spans from acute to
long term care. New trends, advances, and issues in home management of complex conditions,
innovative delivery systems and legal, ethical and policy consideration will be explored.
551. Applied Health Informatics. (H) Bowles.Prerequisite(s): Experience in using the Internet to
retrieve information. Basic knowledge of Microsof Access is expected.
Catalogue Description: This course is designed to address issues related to the impact of information
technology on health care practitioners and consumers of all ages. Students will learn about and gain
experience with practical applications of information technology (Access, handheld devices, telehealth,
Internet resources) that improve the qualityof health care communication and delivery and facilitate
health care research. Class projects include working with clinical databases and evidence based
information sources.

Page 18 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
552. Health Care and Social Policy. (A) Aiken.
This course is an area study or survey of social policy issues in contemporary health care. Topics
include social contexts of health care and health policy; the organization and financing of health
services; the health professions; health and illness over the life cycle; achieving equitable access to
health services; the interface between health and social services. Health problems of national
significance will be addressed including infant mortality, teenage pregnancy, AIDS, the chronically
mentally ill and homeless, health impaired elderly.
553. INNOV & APPLD TECH II. (B)
555. (GSWS555) Women and Incarceration. (A)
This elective course will afford students the opportunity to develop and implement health education
workshops for incarcerated women in the Philadelphiajail system. Students will explore the social and
historical framework and trends in the incarceration of women, as well as the needs of this population,
and will identify specific areas that need to be addressed by particular disciplines or professions.
Students will have direct contact with the jail system, its staff, and female inmates.
567. An Evidence-based Approach to Managing Symptoms in Advanced Illness. (B) Meghani;
Ersek.Prerequisite(s): Junior and Senior undergraduate students may be admitted with course faculty
permission.
This course uses an evidence-based approach towards systematic assessment and management of
common symptoms and symptom clusters accompanying progressive, life-limiting illnesses within a
framework of nationally recognized standards and guidelines for palliative and end-of-life care.
Students are prepared to apply principles of palliative management to diverse patient populations
across clinical settings including acute, primary, long-term, and community care. Refer to course
syllabus or email course faculty for respective requirements.
557. (NURS367) Principles of Palliative Care. (A) Ersek.Prerequisite(s): Undergraduate Students
Need Permission. for Graduate Students and Junior and Senior Undergraduate Nursing Students (with
Course Faculty Permission)
This course examines national and global perspectives and clinical issues in the delivery of palliative
care with diverse populations in multiple health care settings. Students focus on the care of persons
with life-threatening, progressive illness, emphasizing respect for patients' and families' beliefs, values,
and choices. Students also explore psychosocial and spiritual dimensions of palliative care. Historical,
sociocultural, economic, legal, and ethical trends in palliative care are discussed. Factors affecting
health care systems and societal attitudes are considered in evaluating the delivery of care during
advanced illness and at the end of life. Students engage in the critical analysis of literature, research,
and observational experiences concerning biopsychosocial needs of patients and families. Students
acquire competencies in patient/family assessment, communication, decision-making, and
interdisciplinary collaboration in palliative care.
This course satisfies the Society & Social Structures Sector for Nursing Class of 2012 and Beyond.
562. (NURS362) Case Study in Complementary and Alternative Medicine. (K) Cuellar. Undergrads
Need Permission
This course will examine the use of complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) in health
promotion and disease prevention, as well as in acute and chronic health conditions, through
evidence-based research and practice. Implications of CAM on culture, health disparities, society,
economics, safety, legal, ethical, and health policy issues will be explored and discussed.

Page 19 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
566. (NURS366) Living with Dementia. (M) Strumpf; Cotter.
Living with Dementia provides a two fold experience: guided observation of an individual with
dementia and a seminar series on dementia - neuropathology, assessment, care and treatment.
Students will interact with a person with AD and his/her caregiver. The goal is to understand the
demented individual's functional abilities and impact of environment on performance and behavior. A
further goal is to develop an appreciation of the primary caregiver's role and the strengths and
limitations of community support systems. Each team of two to three will be assigned a family unit for
study. In so far as possible, teams will be interdisciplinary.
570. (PUBH500) Introduction to Public Health. (A) Buttenheim; Nguyen.Prerequisite(s): Undegrads
Need Permission.
This course will provide a foundational overview of the field of public health and grounding in the public
health paradigm. Content will include the history of public health, an introduction to the basic public
health sciences including behavioral and social sciences, biostatistics, epidemiology, environmental
public health, policy and management and prevention of chronic and infectious diseases and injuries,
future directions for public health and aan introduction to issues in international health, ethics, context
analysis (specifically the notion of urban health), health promotion and disease prevention paradigms.
577. Advanced Practice Issues for Palliative Care Nurses. (L) Ersek; Meghani;
Polomano.Prerequisite(s): NURS 557. Undergraduates Need Permission
This course provides an in-depth examination of 1) key practice, policy, and ethical issues affecting the
delivery of palliative care and 2) the responsibilities of advanced practice nurses (APRN) providing
care to patients with progressive, life-limiting illness and their families. Learning experiences will focus
on conducting patient/family conferences; examining selected ethical issues in palliative care;
analyzing organizational, economic and health policy issues that affect the delivery of hospice and
palliative care; exploring current and emerging models of palliative care delivery; and creating
approaches to enhancing continuity of palliative care across settings. Students will choose
assignments to meet their professional goals.
580. Pharmacology of Anesthesia and Accessory Drugs I. (A) Magro; Lynn.Prerequisite(s): NURS
617.
This course explores the various routes of anesthetic administration addressing the potential benefits
and risk of each. Special emphasis is placed on specific anesthetic agents and their appropriate use.
The responses and common complications associated with these agents are discussed.
587. (PUBH588) Advanced Leadership Skills in Community Health. (B) Margo; Klusaritz;
Lipman.Prerequisite(s): Enrollment in a Masters or Doctoral program. Undergraduates with permission
of the instructor
Grounded in a social justice perspective, this course aims to provide the student with a foundational
overview of the field of community health and leadership skills in public health advocacy. The course
encourages critical thinking about health outcomes framed by the broad context of the political and
social environment. This course analyzes the range of roles and functions carried out by leaders in
healthcare advocacy for marginalized communities; integrates knowledge of health policy and the key
influence of government and financing on health outcomes; explores community-based participatory
research and interventions as tools for change; and discuss ways to develop respectful partnerships
with community organizations. An assets-based approach that draws upon the strengths of
communities and their leaders provides a foundation for community-engagement skill building. The
course emphasizes the development of skills and techniques to lead effective, collaborative, healthfocused interventions for disenfranchised groups, including residents of urban neighborhoods.

Page 20 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
607. Advanced Physiology and Pathophysiology. (A) Tkacs.Prerequisite(s): Completion of
undergraduate courses that include Biochemistry, Nutrition, Anatomy and Physiology or permission of
the instructor.
This course will integrate advanced physiology with pathophysiology and clinical implications across
the lifespan for advanced nursing practice. Organ systems function and dysfunction from the level of
the cell through integrated organ levels will be presented, and the genetic basis of disease will be
discussed. Recent scientific advances will be discussed with application to new approaches to disease
and symptom management. The interrelationships between basic physiology, clinical pathophysiology,
and genetics are emphasized through lecture and case studies.
588. (GSWS588) The Politics of Women's Health Care. (B) McCool; Durain; Lewis, L..
This course will utilize a multidisciplinary approach to address the field of women's health care. The
constructs of women's health care will be examined from a clinical, as well as sociological,
anthropological and political point of view. Topics will reflect the historical movement of women's health
care from an an obstetrical/gynecological view to one that encompasses the entire life span and life
needs of women. The emphasis of the course will be to undertake a critical exploration of the diversity
diversity of women's health care needs and the past and current approaches to this care. Issues will
be addressed from both a national and global perspective, with a particular focus on the relationship
between women's equality/inequality status and state of health.
This course satisfies the Society & Social Structures Sector for Nursing Class of 2012 and Beyond.
600. Principles and Practice of Transformative Nursing Education. (A) McHugh; Keim; KlenkeBorgmann.Prerequisite(s): Baccalaureate in Nursing plus a Master's Degree in Nursing or in a Health
Related Area. Current Master or Doctoral Students with permission of the Program Director and the
Course Director.
This course is designed to provide expert advanced practice nurses and midwives, currently holding
faculty positons, with a theory and practice base to promote excellence in classroom teaching. The
focus of the course is theories and principles of teaching and learning related to adult learning.
Personal and educational philosophies and their relationship to the learner are explored. Basic
components of curriculum development are integral to the course. A designated mentor teacher at the
home university with a Masters or Doctorate degree, nominated by the student and approved by the
Course Director, works in partnership with the student and Penn faculty.
601. Integrating Classroom and Clinical Pedagogies in Nursing Education. (B) McHugh; Keim;
Klenke-Borgmann.Prerequisite(s): NURS 600.
This course builds on the knowledge attained in NURS 600 as well as the knowledge and skills of the
expert clinician. The focus of the course is clinical teaching for the advanced practitioner, perceptor
preparation and issues related to establishing and maintaining clinical sites. Academic responsibilities
of faculty members, ethical and legal issues in education and educational effects of professional
trends, health care policies and rapidly changing environments are also explored.
608. Advanced Pharmacology and Therapeutics for Nursing Practice. (C) Boulatta; Carey;
Manning.Prerequisite(s): NURS 607 or NURS 685.
Advanced principles of clinical pharmacology and therapeutics are applied to the nursing care of
individuals across the life-stage spectrum. It focuses on the content and knowledge employed by the
advanced practice registered nurse in the management of various conditions and disease states. The
course builds on the pharmacology knowledge base acquired in the baccalaureate nursing program.
The advanced pharmacology and therapeutics of several common diseases or conditions found in the
acute care and primary care setting is presented. This is supplemented with pharmacotherapy
modules to meet program specific needs.

Page 21 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
610. Concepts in Healthcare Economics. (B) Piper, A.
This course examines health care from an economic perspective tailored for the nurse manager and
executive. Emphasis is on the allocation of health care resource policies in the United States with
examination of different health care programs. Within the health care industry, focus is on public and
private health care funding in addition to the role of managed care systems with relation to financing
and delivery of health services.
This course satisfies the Society & Social Structures Sector for Nursing Class of 2012 and Beyond.
612. (HPR 504) Principles and Practice of Healthcare Quality Improvement. (A) Myers, J.; Burke,
K..
Healthcare delivery is complex and constantly changing. A primary mission of leading healthcare
organizations is to advance the quality of patient care by striving to deliver care that is safe, effective,
efficient, timely, cost-effective, and patient-centered (Institute of Medicine). The goal of this
interprofessional course is to provide students with a broad overview of the principles and tools of
quality improvement and patient safety in healthcare as well address the knowledge, skills and
attitudes as defined by the Quality and Safety Education for Nurses (QSEN) guidelines. It will provide
a foundation for students or practicing clinicians who are interested in quality improvement and patient
safety research, administration, or clinical applications.
Content will address the history of the quality improvement process in healthcare, quality databases
and improvement process tools and programs. Through the use of case studies and exercises
students will be become familiar with the use of several quality improvement programs and tools. For
example, the Plan-Do-Study- Act (PDSA) cycle, Six Sigma and the Toyota Production System known
as Lean Production processes will be addressed. Students can use this course to identify the tools
and design the methods that they plan to employ in a quality improvement or patient safety project in
their area of interest.
618. Principles of Nurse Anesthesia Practice II. (B) Magro; Lynn.Prerequisite(s): NURS 617.
This course explores the indications, contraindications and considerations regarding the administration
of regional, epidural and spinal anesthesia. Anatomical and physiological considerations regarding the
administration, monitoring and reversing of anesthetic agents are reviewed. Common side effects and
adverse effects are discussed and the effective treatments of each are explained. Factors leading to
substance abuse are identified and discussed. Opportunities to practice spinal needle placement and
administration of anesthetics are provided in the simulation laboratory.
617. Principles of Nurse Anesthesia Practice I. (L) Magro; Lynn. 12-Week Summer Session
This course explores the various routes of anesthetic administration addressing the potential benefits
and risk of each. Special emphasis is placed on the monitoring of patients during the intra-operative
phase. The responses to the common complications that occur during the intra-operative phase are
discussed utilizing a case study approach.
619. Principles of Nurse Anesthesia Practice III. (L) Magro; Lynn; Winner.Prerequisite(s): NURS
618. 12-Week Summer Session
This course explores the special considerations of pediatric, obstetric, and geriatric patients
undergoing anesthesia. The pre-anesthesia assessment of these patients is discussed with particular
emphasis on the commonly occurring complications and how to anticipate and manage them.
Monitoring for anesthetic effect, hemodynamic effect and potential adverse reactions is reviewed using
a case study approach

Page 22 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
620. Principles of Nurse Anesthesia Practice IV. (A) Magro; Lynn.Prerequisite(s): NURS 619.
This course provides a systems approach to examining specialty surgical procedures and the
anesthesia requirements for each. Analysis of the pre-anesthesia assessment, the intraoperative
monitoring and the post-anesthesia care required for patients undergoing the surgical procedure will
be presented. Population specific considerations will be emphasized.
621. Principles of Nurse Anesthesia Practice V. (B) Magro; Lynn.Prerequisite(s): NURS 620.
This course provides a systems approach to examining specialty surgical procedures and the
anesthesia requirements for each. Analysis of the pre-anesthesia assessment, the intraoperative
monitoring and the post-anesthesia care required for patients undergoing the surgical procedure will
be presented. Population specific considerations will be emphasized.
622. Pathogenesis of Mental Disorders Across the Lifespan. (A) Hanrahan; Tkacs.
The conceptual and practice application of brain-behavior relationships for individuals with mental
health and psychiatric conditions is developed in this course. Students learn interview and differential
diagnostic skills toscreen for neuropsychological etiologies of mental disorders such as schizophrenia,
bipolar disorders, mood disorders and anxiety disorders. The course reviews specific theories of
etiology and diagnostic classifications found in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders-Fourth Edition- Text Revision (DSM IV- TR). Students develop the ability to make critical
decisions as they learn finer points of differentiial diagnosing of mental disorders using a case based
method of learning, allowing students to focus on specific populations such as aged, adults,
adolescents, anchildren.
625. Clinical Modalities Across the Life Cycle in Advanced Practice Psychiatric Mental Health
Nursing. (L) Coleman, C..
Crisis intervention, brief psycho-therapy, group processes and practices, milieu therapy, and
intervention with families are examined as they relate to nursing practice in mental health.
626. Family and Organizational Systems Across the Life Span. (L) Pollack, F.. Summer Session I
This course presents Bowen Family Systems Theory as it applies to families over the life and
organizations over time. This is a theoretical course whose purpose is to provide the student with a
broad, systemic perspective on human functioning. The course begins with a detailed presentation of
Systems Theory, from both a family and organizational perspective. As presented there is a continual
compare and contrast to other dominant theories of human functioning. It then applies the concepts of
Systems Theory to the understanding and assessment of the stages of the normal family life cycle
from a multi-generational, multi-cultural perspective. This is followed by discussions of the theory's
application to the emotional problems of children, adolescents, adults and their families. Likewise,
application to organizational behavior is made, including health care organizations. Relevant research
is discussed throughout.
628. Mental Health and Aging. (B) Cacchione; Evans.
An examination of the psycho-socio-cultural processes which influence the behavior patterns, coping,
and adaptation of older adults. The course emphasizes strategies to promote mental health as well as
assessment, presentation, and intervention in the major acute and chronic psychiatric disorders
affecting the older adult.

Page 23 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
637. Introduction to Research Methods and Design. (C) Tulman; Polomano; Spatz;
Hatfield.Prerequisite(s): Undegraduate Statistics Class. Must hold an RN license. Also offered in 6
week Summer Session I and 12 week Summmer Session I & II
The relationships among nursing theory, research and practice will be examined. An emphasis will be
placed on research competencies for advanced practice nurses (APNs), including understanding
nursing research methods and strategies in order to evaluate research results for applicability to
practice and to design projects for evaluating outcomes of practice. An understanding of statistical
techniques will be integrated into the course and build on the required undergraduate statistics course.
Published nursing research studies will be evaluated for scientific merit and clinical feasibility, with a
focus on evidence-based practice.
641. Autism Spectrum Disorder: Prevalence, Etiology, Screening and Assessment. (A) PintoMartin; Souders.Prerequisite(s): Post-BSN students only. Junior and senior undergraduate students
may be admitted with course faculty permission.
Through classroom and clinical experiences, this course provides an overview of the public health
problem of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Content addresses the natural history, etiology, rising
prevalence, risk factors, and core features. Changes in prevalence statistics and possible causes are
outlineThese subjects are described in general terms for an overall picture of the disorder. Taking a
developmental approach, students begin case management and follow a family through screening,
diagnosis and treatment planning. Key information is elaborated through case studies. The course
highlights the important and evolving role of nurses in the care of people with ASD. Content is
supported by the scientific literature. Students' clinical experiences startthe identification of and
collaborative work with a family that has a young chiwith ASD. The student follows that family and the
child through diagnosis, treatments and long term planning. This case approach allows the student to
work with the same family over the entire post-masters program to learn the value of interdisciplinary,
contiguous care.
640. (PUBH551, SOCI640, SWRK793) Global Health and Health Policy. (M) Aiken; Voet;
McLaughlin.
This participatory interdisciplinary seminar course examines contemporary issues in public health
policy and global health. The organizing framework is social determinants of health. We consider
evidence that inequalities in education, income, and occupation influence health status, and the policy
dilemma that broad interventions to improve population health may increase health disparities. We
critically examine whether prevention is always better than cure, and what modern medicine has to
offer in terms of health. We explore the public policy process in health using the "tobacco wars" as a
case example, of how politics, policy, law, commercial interests, and research intersect to affect the
public's health. We examine whether global health is in a state of decline, and the extent to which
failures in public health, public policy, and foreign policy have contributed to increasing threats to world
health. Likewise we will examine the potential for greater integration of health into foreign policy to
create global infrastructure upon which to advance health. We will examine the global health workforce
and the impact of widespread global migration of health professionals on receiving and sending
countries.
There are no prerequisites. The course is designed for graduate students in the social and
behavioral sciences, health professions, public health, business and law. Advanced undergraduate
students will be admitted with permission.

Page 24 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
642. Health and Behavioral Care Planning and Intervention for Autism Spectrum Disorder. (B)
Pinto-Martin; Souders.Prerequisite(s): NURS 641.
Through classroom and clinical experiences, this course focuses on the application of various
treatment approaches to the management of acute and chronic problems of autism spectrum disorder.
Approaches to behavioral, psychological and medical co-morbidities are explored, practiced and
evaluated. Students' clinical experiences build on the previous semester and continue with the
application of class instruction to patient and family care. The student works closely with behaviorists,
psychologists and occupational therapists to integrate nursing care planning with other services. This
case approach continues, and exposure to a second family is added to expand learning opportunities
and develop nursing services.
643. Leadership, Advocacy, and the Practice of Integrated Nursing Care of ASD. (L) Pinto-Martin;
Souders.Prerequisite(s): NURS 642. Spring and/or Summer Offering
Emphasis is on the synthesis of course content practice. Through classroom and clinical experiences,
students critically examine the role of nursing in the life-long care of people with ASD, and identify
ways to expand the scope of nursing care for this vulnerable population. Students explore the
availability of services in the community and discuss approaches to patient advocacy. Students have
opportunities to select an area of specialization to develop specific practice expertise. Such areas are
Diagnosis and Referral Practices (e.g. ADOS Training), Behavioral Therapy Training (e.g. Applied
Behavioral Analysis), and clinical research. Practical issues of collaboration and reimbursement for
services are explored. Students' clinical experiences are designed to facilitate scholarship,
independence and advanced specialization in a chosen component of ASD care, for example,
behavioral analysis, screening and/or diagnosis, or an agenda for research. Students identify and
implement an independent project.
644. Health Care in an Aging Society. (B) Bradway;.
Individual and societal influences on the care of older adults are examined in detail within the context
of an emerging health care system. Normal changes in physical and psychological health are explored
in depth. Significant issues affecting care of older adults and their families at the global and national
level are discussed.
645. Psychopharmacology Across the Lifespan. (B) Hanrahan.Prerequisite(s): NURS 622.
This course focuses on the development of knowledge and skills related to the use of
psychopharmacologic agents to treat mental illness by the advanced practice nurse. Using a case
study method to encourage the application of knowledge to clinical practice, the course addresses
culturally diverse client populations, across the life span, who present with a range of symptom
manifestations, at all levels of severity. The course emphasizes evidence-based practice, researchbased clinical decision making and a wholistic approach to integrating the science and biology of the
mind with social and behavioral interventions. The case base method allows students to focus on
specific populations such as older adults, adults, adolescents, and children.

Page 25 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
649. Primary Care Clinical Practicum: Complex Diagnosis and Management of Adults across
the Lifespan. (B) Cotter; Taylor.Prerequisite(s): NURS 646, 647. Corequisite(s): NURS 648.
The focus of this course is the application of concepts presented in the Complex Diagnosis and
Management of Adults Across the Lifespan (NURS 648) including initial workups of new patients, and
the evaluation and management of patients with self-limiting acute problems, or stable chronic
illnesses. Students will gain increased clinical expertise in a variety of community-based clinical
settings including but not limited to health maintenance organizations, community clinics, long term
care, assisted living, continuing care retirement communities, occupational health settings, and private
practice. The student will gain increased expertise in communication skills, health assessment skills,
interpreting findings, applying epidemiological concepts and developing and implementing plans of
care for adults across the lifespan with health maintenance needs, and/or common acute and chronic
health problems.
646. Primary Care: Diagnosis and Management of Adults Across the Lifespan. (A) Bradway;
Cotter.Prerequisite(s): NURS 657.
This course focuses on development of critical thinking skills to address health care problems of adults
across the lifespan, with an emphasis on middle-aged and older adults, develop differential problem
solving skills and determine appropriate management interventions. The management of common
acute and chronic health conditions will include evidence based primary preventions, drug and
treatment therapeutics, and referral to other health care providers. Students have the opportunity to
build on previously acquired skills and to apply concepts of primary care to manage the health
problems of adults across the lifespan.
647. Primary Care Clinical Practicum: Diagnosis and Management of Adults across the
Lifespan. (A) Cross; O'Sullivan.Prerequisite(s): NURS 657. Corequisite(s): NURS 646.
Management and evaluation of primary care problems of middle-aged and older adults in a variety of
ambulatory and occupational settings. Opportunity to implement the role of the nurse practitioner with
middle-aged and older adults and their families in the community. Interdisciplinary experiences will be
pursued & collaborative practice emphasized. Students are expected to assess and begin to manage
common chronic health problems in consultation with the appropriate provider of care. The initiation of
health promotion & health maintenance activities with individuals and groups is stressed. Includes 16
hours a week of clinical experience with a preceptor.
648. Primary Care: Complex Diagnosis and Management of Adults across the Lifespan. (B)
Cotter.Prerequisite(s): NURS 646, 647.
This course will build on concepts presented in the Diagnosis and Management of Adults across the
Lifespan (NURS 646) course. The focus is on refining health assessment skills, interpreting findings,
developing and implementing appropriate plans of care to meet common health maintenance needs of
adults and to promote the health of adults with more complex health problems with an emphasis on
the frail adult. The student will gain increased expertise in communication skills, health assessment
skills, interpreting findings, epidemiological concepts and developing and implementing plans of care.
The emphasis will be placed upon managing an aging population with complex, chronic healthcare
needs and promoting healthy behaviors across the lifespan.

Page 26 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
650. Systems Thinking in Patient Safety. (B) Keim; Burke, K..
This blended online/in-classroom graduate level course integrates principles of systems thinking with
foundational concepts in patient safety. Utilizing complexity theories, students assess healthcare
practices and identify factors that contribute to medical errors and impact patient safety. Using a
clinical microsystem framework, learners assess a potential patient safety issue and create preventive
systems. Lessons learned from the science of safety are utilized in developing strategies to enhance
safe system redesign. Core competencies for all healthcare professionals are emphasized, content is
applicable for all healthcare providers including, but not limited to, nurses, pharmacists, physicians,
social workers and healthcare administrators, and may be taken as an elective by non-majors.
651. Nursing Informatics. (L) Bowles; Maffei.Prerequisite(s): Basic Computer Skills.
This course is designed to introduce the student to fundamental concepts and issues surrounding
technology and information management in today's rapidly changing health care environment.
Emphasis will be placed on defining informatics and the models and theories used in its development.
To prepare the student to take a leadership role in information system design and selection the class
will study the process of information systems analysis, implementation and evaluation involving
functional, organizational and human aspects.
652. Applied Healthcare Accounting and Business Planning. (B) Keim; Fuir.
This course focuses on the management of financial resources in the healthcare industry particularly
in inpatient and ambulatory care settings. Specific emphasis is on applied accounting, budgeting,
capital planning, nursing staffing/scheduling and variance analysis. Additionally, students will apply
concepts in developing a business/program plan including completion of an environmental scan, costbenefit analysis and marketing plan. Students will engage in strategic planning, stakeholder analysis
and benchmarking efforts.
655. Nursing Administration Practicum. (C) Keim, DiMichele.Prerequisite(s): NURS 699.
This administrative practicum will be individually tailored to meet each student's career goals. Students
will be placed with an expert role model who in most instances will be a practicing nurse executive.
The setting may vary according to the student's interests and objectives. Examples include acute care,
home care, long term care, occupational health, community based clinics, consulting groups and
political/legislative experiences.
659. Clinical Practicum: Primary Care with Young Families. (C) O'Sullivan.Prerequisite(s): NURS
656, 657. Corequisite(s): NURS 658.
Management and evaluation of primary care problems of children in a variety of ambulatory settings.
Opportunity to implement the role of nurse practitioner with children and their families in the
community occurs under the guidance of faculty and experienced preceptors. The initiation of health
promotion and health maintenance activities with individuals and groups is stressed. Collaborative,
interdisciplinary practice is emphasized as students assess and manage common problems in
consultation with an appropriate provider of care. 20 hours a week of clinical experience with a
preceptor is arranged.
656. Professional Role Issues for Nurse Practitioners. (A) O'Sullivan; Bryan. Corequisite(s): NURS
657.
This course is intended for students planning a career that involves primary health care delivery. It
includes lectures, discussions, readings, and projects focused on health, social, economic and
professional factors influencing health care delivery in the community.

Page 27 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
657. Advanced Physical Assessment and Clinical Decision Making. (A) Buzby; Reger; Sherry.
This is a laboratory/clinical course designed to help prospective nurse practitioners develop advanced
clinical assessment skills. Provider-patient interaction, data collection, and hypothesis formulation are
emphasized. All participants engage in actual practice with fellow students, and/or models, and
consenting patients.
658. Clinical Management of Primary Care with Young Families. (C) O'Sullivan.Prerequisite(s):
NURS 656, 657. Corequisite(s): NURS 659.
Assessment and treatment of the young child in ambulatory care settings is the focus of this
developmentally organized course. This course provides the nurse practitioner student with the
necessary knowledge and experience to assist individuals with the most common health problems,
including acute episodic illness as well as stable chronic disease. The concepts of health promotion
and health maintenance are integrated throughout the curriculum. Using a developmental framework,
the maturational tasks and problems of children and their families in relation to illness and health are
explored.
660. Clinical Practice with Select Populations: Adolescents. (L) O'Sullivan.Prerequisite(s): NURS
656, 657, 658, 659. Summer Session I
Focus on assessment and treatment of adolescents in a variety of settings. Didactic emphasis is on
the special needs encountered among adolescents. This course adds to the student's previous
knowledge and skill in the delivery of primary care. Working with this specific population the student
gains necessary knowledge and experience in assisting individuals with most common health
problems, including acute episodic illness and stable chronic disease, as well as health promotion
needs.
661. Clinical Management of Primary Care with Adults. (L) O'Sullivan.Prerequisite(s): NURS 646,
647 or NURS 658, 659. Summer Session I
Assessment and treatment of younger adults in ambulatory care settings is the focus of this clinical
course.The course provides the nurse practitioner student with the necessary knowledge and
experience to assist individuals with most common health problems, including acute episodic illness.
The concepts of health promotion and health maintenance are integrated throughout the curriculum.
Using a developmental framework, maturational tasks and problems of the adult and family in relation
to illness and health are explored.
663. Advanced Concepts in Primary Care. (L) O'Sullivan.Prerequisite(s): NURS 660 or NURS 661.
Summer Session II
In conjunction with the development of advanced clinical skills, students focus on advanced practice
role development and the study of issues in health service delivery related to the practice of primary
health care. Economics, case management and cultural/ethical aspects of care are discussed.

Page 28 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
664. Advanced Practice Nursing for Oncology Care. (A) Hollis; Polomano.Prerequisite(s): NURS
607; NURS 637. Summer 12 Week Session ; Permission to take this course as an elective must be
approved by the course faculty.
Students are introduced to cancer epidemiology and pathophysiology, cancer genetics, prevention,
risk assessment and reduction for specific cancers, screening techniques, diagnostic procedures and
criteria, and local and systemic therapies used to treat cancer. The influence of individual
characteristics on health promotion, health behaviors, population cancer risk, and cancer detection are
explored in the context of biological, psychological, socioeconomic and sociocultural factors across
age groups from adolescents to older adults. Evidence-based practice guidelines and research are
applied to promote healthy lifestyles, monitor cancer risk, address psychosocial issues, facilitate
access to care, and reduce health care disparities for populations at risk and diagnosed with cancer,
and cancer survivors.
666. Effects of Cancer and Cancer Therapy. (B) Walker; Prechtel-Dunphy.Prerequisite(s): NURS
646, 664. Corequisite(s): NURS 667.
Principles of cancer treatment, associated responses and symptom management are presented.
Emphasis is on the development of advanced clinical decision making skills in identifying multiple
alterations resulting from cancer and cancer therapy.
667. Oncology Nursing: Assessment, Diagnosis, & Cancer Management. (B) Polomano; Walker;
Prechtel-Dunphy.Prerequisite(s): NURS 664, NURS 666. Corequisite(s): NURS 666.$60 Lab Fee
Emphasis is on the application of critical thinking and diagnostic reasoning skills in advanced clinical
decision making. Students access, diagnose, and manage the care of oncology patients with a variety
of cancers. The delivery of care and evaluation of role effectiveness within the health care system are
examined.
SM 673. Advanced Clinical Decisions in Adult Gerontology Acute Care. (A) Pawlow; Griffith;
Becker.Prerequisite(s): NURS 607, 657. Corequisite(s): NURS 670.
This didactic and fieldwork course focuses on development of a systematic approach to advanced
physical assessment, the use and interpretation of diagnostic technologies and development of
diagnostic reasoning as it applies to patient management of the adult-older adult acutely ill or injured
patient. Emphasis is placed on development of competence to perform a comprehensive history and
physical examination, incorporating the analysis of biotechnological data trends. Building fundamental
skills in developing differential diagnoses and clinical decision making for acutely ill patients across the
adult age continuum is a focus of this course.
670. Principles of Adult Gerontology Acute Care I. (A) Pawlow; Elgart; Becker; Doherty.
This didactic course examines the epidemiologic, assessment, diagnostic, management and
evaluation of acutely or critically ill adults across the adult-older adult age spectrum. Students explore
the dynamic interplay between the pathophysiologic basis of disease and the psychosocial and sociocultural responses to acute and critical illness and injury as they develop clinical decision-making
skills. An evidence-based approach to nursing and medical management including pharmacologic and
non-pharmacologic modalities is emphasized. Cardiovascular and pulmonary systems, infectious and
prevention issues commonly encountered by adults are covered. Particular focus is placed on specific
issues related to the older adult such as frailty, dehydration, loss of functional mobility, falls, and other
geriatric syndromes.

Page 29 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
671. Principles of Adult Gerontology Acute Care II. (B) Pawlow; Elgart; Becker; Doherty.
In this didactic course, students learn to integrate their advanced pharmacology and pathophysiology
background with their understanding of acute illness and injury. The focus is on the evidence-based
management of patients with neurologic, gastrointestinal, renal, oncologic, and metabolic health
problems. Students develop skills to create a differential diagnosis when an adult/older-adult presents
with a constellation of symptoms. Common and atypical presentations of illness and disease are
explored. Focus is placed on holistic care including the psychosocial, cultural, and spiritual aspects of
patients' response to their illness or injury. Epidemiology, assessment, diagnosis, management, and
advanced clinical decision making based on current clinical research are emphasized.
672. Principles of Adult Gerontology Acute Care III. (L) Pawlow; Elgart; Becker; Doherty.
This didactic course examines issues related to the epidemiology, assessment, diagnosis,
management and evaluation of acute, critical and complex chronically ill adults across the adult-older
adult age continuum. Students explore the dynamic interplay between the pathophysiologic basis of
disease and the psychosocial and socio-cultural responses to illness and injury across the adult age
continuum as they develop clinical decision-making skills. An evidence-based approach to nursing and
medical management including pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic modalities is emphasized.
Content focuses on special adult and older adult patient populations with commonly encountered
health problems.
674. Adult Gerontology Acute Care NP: Professional Role and Clinical Practicum I. (B) Becker ;
Griffith.Prerequisite(s): NURS 673.
This didactic and clinical fieldwork course explores issues relevant to the role of the Adult Gerontology
Acute Care Nurse Practitioner within the complex U.S. health care system. Role development,
reimbursement issues, provision of quality and ethical care and evidence-based nursing and medical
interventions are introduced and discussed in the classroom. Clinical fieldwork focuses on assessment
of complex acute, critical and chronically-ill patients for urgent and emergent conditions, using both
physiologically and technologically derived data, to evaluate for physiologic instability and potential lifethreatening conditions, development of differential diagnoses, application of diagnostic reasoning and
formulation, implementation, evaluation and modification of individualized plans of care including
pharmacological and non-pharmacological modalities. Development of advanced clinical
competencies and clinical decision making abilities about adults across the age continuum is
emphasized. .
675. Adult Gerontology Acute Care NP: Professional Role and Clinical Practicum II. (L) Becker;
Griffith; Doherty.Prerequisite(s): NURS 670, 671, 672, 673, 674. Summer I & II - 12 Week Course
This didactic and fieldwork course focuses on the role of the Adult Gerontology Acute Care Nurse
Practitioner and the expansion of advanced clinical competencies and clinical decision making
abilities. Clinical experiences in acute care settings provide the student with opportunities to refine
history and physical examination techniques, diagnostic reasoning, formulation, implementation,
evaluation and modification of individualized management plans. Specific attention is given to the
unique presentation of syndromes and constellation of symptoms that may be typical or atypical
presentation of complex acute, critical and chronic illness in adults and older adults. Facilitating
transition of patients at varying life stages through the complex health care system is encouraged
exploring the multiple governmental, social and personal resources available to acutely ill adults
across the age continuum. The application of advanced nursing, medical and biopsychosocial
knowledge in the management of patients and the collaboration between the nurse practitioner and
the patient, family and interprofessional healthcare team are emphasized.

Page 30 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
677. (PUBH530) Environmental Toxicology: Risk Assessment and Health Effects. (A) Liu.
Undergraduates Need Permission
This course presents general principals of toxicology and the disposition of toxins in the body. Case
studies of the effects of environmental and occupational toxins on individuals will be analyzed. This
course is designed for students who desire a strong foundation in toxicological concepts and principals
and provides an overview of major toxins in our environment and their association with human health.
681. Applied Physiology for Nurse Anesthetists I. (L) Magro; Lynn; Tkacs. 12 Week Summer
Session
This course provides an in-depth analysis of the anatomy, physiology and patho-physiology of the
respiratory and cardiovascular systems and related anesthesia implications. The concepts of
ventilation and perfusion as they relate to oxygen and anesthetic delivery and metabolism are
examined. The effects of compromised cardiac and pulmonary function and their implications for the
patient and anesthesia plan are reviewed. The impact of anesthesia on the structure and function of
the heart as a pump as well as the characteristics of systemic circulation will be explored. The effect of
surgery and anesthesia on the respiratory and cardiovascular systems will be emphasized.
682. Applied Physiology for Nurse Anesthetists II. (A) Magro; Lynn; Libonati.Prerequisite(s): NURS
681. Corequisite(s): NURS 607.
This course provides an in-depth analysis of the anatomy, physiology and pathophysiology of the
hepatic, renal, nervous, hormonal, immunologic and hematological systems and related anesthesia
implications. The focus of discussion will be on the special considerations when delivering anesthetic
agents to patients. Emphasis will be placed on the assessment of the patient with common disorders
of these systems. Nurse anesthesia care related to patients undergoing surgeries involving each
system will be discussed.
683. Applied Science Related to Anesthesia. (B) Magro; Lynn; Scanga.Prerequisite(s): NURS 607,
681, 682.
This course is an in-depth analysis of the chemical and physical principles as they apply to nurse
anesthesia practice. Aspects of organic and biochemistry including the chemical structures of
compounds and its significance in pharmacology will be explored. Applications of the laws of physics
as they pertain to nurse anesthesia practice will be reviewed with specific examples. Emphasis on the
dynamics of the anesthesia delivery system and related equipment will be presented.
685. Advanced Developmental Physiology and Pathophysiology. (A)
Marino.Prerequisite(s): Undergraduate course in Anatomy & Physiology.

Trimarchi;

This course will address advanced human embryology, physiology and pathophysiology. Biochemical
genetics and the genetic basis of disease will be discussed. Normal fetal development and physiology
of organ systems will be used as the foundation for understanding the pathophysiology of disease
across the lifespan.
686. (NURS736, NURS781) Well Woman Health Care. (A) Durain; Grube; NagtalonRamos.Prerequisite(s): NURS 657.
This course focuses on the management and evaluation of physical, emotional, socio-cultural and
educational needs of gynecologic primary health care of women from adolescence through postmenopausal years. The content is directed at expanding the expertise of the student in in meeting the
primary women's health care needs in contemporary society. Social influences that have an impact on
women's lives are also explored.

Page 31 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
688. Complementary/Alternative Therapies in Women's Health. (A) Grube.
The dramatic rise in the use of complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) by the American public
requires that the contemporary health care practitioner have an awareness of CAM therapies and
modalities currently available. The end result of this is course will not be proficiency in the practice of
any of these modalities in particular, but rather a basic understanding of each approach to common
conditions and their potential contribution to health and well-being. The focus of the CAM modalities
discussed in this course will center on their use in women's health care provision.
690. Family Focused Primary Care of the Middle-Aged and Older Adult. (B)
O'Sullivan.Prerequisite(s): NURS 656, 657. Corequisite(s): NURS 691.
This course focuses on primary care problems encountered by middle-aged and older adults and their
families. Students have the opportunity to build on previously acquired skills and to apply concepts of
primary care to manage the complex health problems of middle-aged and older adults.
691. Clinical Practicum: Family Focused Primary Care of the Middle Aged and Older Adult. (B)
O'Sullivan.Prerequisite(s): NURS 656, 657. Corequisite(s): NURS 690.
The focus of this course is the evaluation and management of primary care problems in middle-aged
and older adults. Students will have an opportunity to implement the role of the nurse practitioner in
the clinical setting. Interdisciplinary collaborative experiences will be essential to the clinical practicum.
The initiation of health promotion and health maintenance activities with individuals, groups and
families is stressed. Students are expected to assess and manage common chronic health problems
in the clinical setting.
693. Professional Issues in Midwifery. (A) McCool; Reale; Guidera.Prerequisite(s): NURS 787, 788.
Corequisite(s): NURS 786.
In-depth discussion of current issues facing the profession of nurse-midwifery which impact on
professional education, certification, and practice. Includes ethical, legal, and political aspects of
nurse-midwifery practice.
697. Leadership in Advanced Oncology Nursing Practice. (L) Keim; Prechtel Dunphy; Sherry;
Walker.Prerequisite(s): NURS666 and all requisite nursing courses in the Nursing & Healthcare
Administration (NADM) program. May be taken concomitantly with NURS699 or at the discretion of the
NADM Program Director.
Students explore the diagnosis and treatment of common cancers in a multidisciplinary approach. The
broad array of bio-medical and psychosocial issues that result from the disease itself across the illness
continuum are studied. Quality of life, rehabilitation and palliative care issues related to cancer care
are addressed. Additionally, students complete an administrative practicum with a nursing leader in an
oncology specialty area within a healthcare organization.

Page 32 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
698. Practicum: Quality Improvement in Healthcare. (A) Piper; Keim.Prerequisite(s): NURS 650,
NURS 537, NURS 612. Summer and Fall Placement
Building on coursework that provided a broad overview of the principles and tools of quality
improvement and patient safety in healthcare, students will apply this knowledge through completion
of a mentored quality improvement project in a healthcare organization. In collaboration with faculty
and health organization preceptors, students will identify a quality improvement opportunity and
develop specific project objectives including, but not limited to, the use of appropriate tools,
identification of measureable aims and evaluation methods, sustainable recommendations for process
improvement and a comprehensive report of findings and recommendations. This course is part of the
Quality Improvement and Safety Processes in Healthcare Minor and should be completed by the
student as the capstone course in that minor; students engage in 192 hours of on-site project work.
699. Advanced Roles in Administrative Nursing Practice. (L) Rich ; Keim.Prerequisite(s): For
Students of the Nursing Administration and Healthcare Leadership Only. Summer II Semester
Offered at the end of the Nursing and Health Care Administration or Health Care Leadership
programs, this course prepares the graduate for entry into a myriad of administrative or leadership
roles. Students will explore role responsibilities for various levels of management positions; health care
consultants; health policy advocates; global health leaders; staff development directors; and
administrators in non-traditional settings i.e., journal editors, professional associations etc.
705. Advanced Practice Nursing Practice: Psychiatric Mental Health NP I. (A) Leahy; Mulligan;
Josey.
Supervised advanced psychiatric mental health nursing practice with children, adolescents and their
families, or adults and/or older adults and their families in a variety of settings, depending on the
subspecialty option selected. Focus is on clinical assessment/diagnosis and decision-making. A
minimum of 16 hours of practice and 3 hours of small group supervision is required.
SM 706. Advanced Practice Nursing Practice: Psychiatric Mental Health NP II. (B) Leahy;
Mulligan; Josey.
Supervised advanced psychiatric mental health nursing practice with children, adolescents and their
families, or adults and/or older adults and their families in a variety of settings, depending on the
subspeciality option selected. Refinement and development of clinical intervention with an increasingly
diverse caseload. A minimum of 16 hours of practice and 3 hours of small group supervision is
required.
SM 707. Advanced Practice Nursing Practice: Psychiatric Mental Health NP III. (L) Leahy;
Mulligan; Josey. Summer Session I
Supervised advanced psychiatric mental health nursing practice with children, adolescents and their
families, or adults and/or older adults and their families in a variety of settings, depending on the
subspecialty option selected. Outcome evaluation, termination and professional role development. A
minimum of 16 hours of practice and 3 hours of small group supervision is required.

Page 33 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
708. Public Policy Leadership in the American Public/Private System of Health Care. (B) Durain.
This course will explore the philosophy and growth of public policy that has directed the American
Health Care System in its ever expanding movement toward universal health care for all citizens.
Analysis of health policy and systems content will assist the students to identify the knowledge and
skills needed for the health or human service provider to assume leadership roles in the formulation of
public policy for change; this includes system restructuring, service delivery and funding of health care.
Emphasis will be on the effect of policy on the individual/family user of health care services rather than
the effect on professional health care providers or health care delivery systems. Special attention will
be given to the effect of policy on populations, both urban and rural, living near and below the poverty
level.
714. Management of Critically Ill Children with Acute and Chronic Conditions: Nursing of
Critically Ill Children Advanced Clinical. (L) Verger; Bartke.Prerequisite(s): NURS 712, 713.
Summer Session II
This clinical course is designed with emphasis on continued development of advanced clinical
decision-making skills in the care of critically ill children. Emphasis is placed on knowledge and skills
that allow the advanced practitioner to efficiently and effectively manage children who are dependent
upon or assisted by technological devices to carry out life processes.
715. Common Management Issues of Children with Acute and Chronic Conditions: Pediatric
Oncology. (A) Hobbie.
This course examines the unique contribution made by nurses with advanced clinical skills inthe care
of children with oncologic and hematologic disorders, and their families, from the time of diagnosis
throughout the treatment period and beyond. The course provides the student with the most recent
advances in knowledge about cancer in childhood. While the focus is on oncology, hematologic
disorders as well as AIDS will be discussed. Recent methods of treatment and the nursing
management of children and their families will be addressed.
720. Nursing of Children Theory I: Child and Family Development. (A) Deatrick; Murphy, K.
This course focuses on developmental theories and concepts that form the basis for nursing
assessment and intervention with children and families. Emphasis is given to current research and
issues in child and family development and functioning.
731. High-Risk Neonate, Theory. (B) Verger; Steele.Prerequisite(s): NURS 684, 720, 721.
Corequisite(s): NURS 733.Summer Session I
This course focuses on the care of high-risk neonates within the context of the family unit. The
biological and psychosocial aspects are studied as a basis for nursing practice. Emphasis is placed on
the role of the Advanced Practice nurse in improving services to high-risk neonates with the purpose
of decreasing mortality and morbidity rates and improving the quality of life of high-risk newborns and
infants.
721. Advanced Physical Assessment and Clinical Decision Making: Nursing of Children Clinical
I. (A) Lipman; Reilly, L.. Corequisite(s): NURS 685.
This clinical course is designed to help prospective advanced practice nurses develop advanced skills
in physical and developmental assessment of children in a variety of well-child, clinic and hospital
settings. Data collection, data interpretation, and hypothesis formulations are emphasized for the
purpose of clinical decision making. The role of the advanced practice nurse in assessment of primary
health care issues and health promotion is incorporated throughout the course. Collaboration as an
integral part of assessment will be an ongoing focus.

Page 34 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
733. Clinical Practicum for the High Risk Neonate. (B) Verger; Steele.Prerequisite(s): NURS 684,
720, 721. Corequisite(s): NURS 731.
This clinical course focuses on the care of the high risk infant within the context of the family unit.
Clinical experiences provide students with opportunities to expand their skills in managing the care of
infants, both acutely ill and growing neonates. Students continue their experiences with neonatal nurse
practitioners to examine role issues of these individuals.
734. Intermediate Principles of Pediatric Acute Care. (B) Murphy, K.; Verger.Prerequisite(s): NURS
720; NURS 721; NURS 685 or NURS 607. Corequisite(s): NURS 735.
This course focuses on evidenced based care for infants, children, and adolescents with complex
acute and chronic health conditions. Emphasis is placed on developing a framework for practice based
on a synthesis of knowledge from biological, behavioral, and nursing sciences through the process of
advanced clinical decision making. The student gains the necessary clinical management skills to
provide specialized patient centered care across the entire pediatric age spectrum from complex
chronic illness to physiologic deterioration and life threatening instability with emphasis on the patient
and family as a full partner in decision making.
735. Pediatric Acute Care Nurse Practitioner: Professional Role and Intermediate Clinical
Practice. (B) Verger; Lipman; Schucker; Campisciano.Prerequisite(s): NURS 720; NURS 721; NURS
685 or NURS 607. Corequisite(s): NURS 734.
This course focuses on the implementation of the professional role of the Pediatric Acute Care Nurse
Practitioner (PNP-AC). Particular emphasis is placed on the role components of the nurse practitioner
in pediatric acute care. Applications of nursing, biological and behavioral science are emphasized in
the advanced clinical assessment, clinical decision making and management skills needed to care for
complex, unstable acutely and chronically ill children and their families. The role of the advanced
practice nurse in promoting optimal child/family outcomes is emphasized.
L/R 736. Advanced Principles of Pediatric Acute Care. (L) Murphy, K; Verger; Lipman.Prerequisite
(s): NURS 734; NURS 735. Corequisite(s): NURS 737.
This course expands the student's understanding evidenced based care for infants, children, and
adolescents with complex acute and chronic health conditions. Emphasis is placed on advancing a
framework for practice based on a synthesis of knowledge from biological, behavioral, and nursing
sciences through clinical decision making. The student continues to gain the necessary clinical
management skills to provide specialized patient centered care across the entire pediatric age
spectrum from complex chronic illness to physiologic deterioration and life threatening instability with
emphasis on the patient and family as a full partner in decision making.
737. Pediatric Acute Care Nurse Practitioner: Professional Role and Advanced Clinical Practice.
(L) Verger; Lipman; Schucker; Campisciano.Prerequisite(s): NURS 734; NURS 735. Corequisite(s):
NURS 736.
This course focuses on the implementation of the professional role of the Pediatric Acute Care Nurse
Practitioner (PNP-AC). This course adds to the students' previous knowledge and skills and prepares
them to deliver care to children of any age who require frequent monitoring and intervention.
Applications of nursing, biological and behavioral science are emphasized in the advanced clinical
assessment, clinical decision making and management skills needed to care for complex, unstable
acutely and chronically ill children and their families.

Page 35 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
740. Advanced Practice Concepts for the Childbearing Family. (A) Steele.
The seminar will provide students with the skills necessary to provide primary health care to high risk
infants in ambulatory settings. Course material will include detailed physical assessment skills of the
infant through the first year of life. The clinical component will include home visits and experience in
the ambulatory and long term care settings.
741. Management of Children with Acute and Chronic Conditions: Nursing of Children in the
Community Advanced Clinical. (L) Deatrick; Lipman; Murphy, K..Prerequisite(s): NURS 724, 725.
Summer Session II
This clinical course focuses on the implementation of the role of the advanced practice nurse with
particular emphasis on providing continuity of care for children with specialized health needs across
their transitions in sites of care delivery and throughout phases in the cycle of their illnesses.
Application of nursing, biological and behavioral science is emphasized in the community aspects of
clinical assessment and management of children with health care needs and their families.
747. Evidence-Based Practice for Nurse Anesthetists II. (A) Magro; Lynn; Gidaro.Prerequisite(s):
NURS 746.
This course examines the evidence-based research to determine whether the procedures and
techniques performed by nurse anesthetists are supported by the literature. Population specific topics
of concern to nurse anesthetists are discussed. Student led seminars will guide the classroom
discussions.
743. Fetal Evaluation. (B) Stringer.Prerequisite(s): NURS 607.
This course focuses on identifying at risk and high risk maternal fetal dyads, developing knowledge
relating to assessment of fetal well being, and understanding the implications of obstetric, non
obstertric, and fetal complications on the management of the high risk pregnancy. Additionally the
course provides an understanding of the scientific basis for new technologies used to evaluate at risk
and high risk populations. Information about the physics of ultrasound, pulse echo imaging, and
doppler techniques will be provided. Students must be able to practice ultrasound skills while in this
course.
746. Evidence-Based Practice for Nurse Anesthetists I. (L) Magro; Lynn; Gidaro. 12 Week Summer
Session
This course examines the evidence-based research to determine whether the procedures and
techniques performed by nurse anesthetists are supported by the literature. Population specific topics
of concern to nurse anesthetists are discussed. Student led seminars will guide the classroom
discussions.
748. Leadership Development in Healthcare. (A) Fidyk.
This course will provide the conceptual and theoretical framework for examining the concept of
leadership within the contexts of health systems, health professionals and health policy. It will focus on
characteristics of personal and professional leadership, change theory, and the application of critical
thinking to the analysis of work environments, systems and the politics of health.

Page 36 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
749. History, Health and Social Policy. (B) D'Antonio.
This course explores the impact of historical ideas, events, and actors on current issues in health and
illness care. Topics include the movement from hospitals to health care systems; the changing
definitions of professionalism and professional practice patterns; and the ways historical context
shapes definitions of leadership roles and theoretical knowledge.
750. Inquiry and Nursing. (A) Richmond. For doctoral students in nursing
This course introduces students to the process of intellectual inquiry. It explores the intellectual
foundations of scholarly disciplines in general and the discipline of nursing in particular. Emphasis is
placed on the process of knowledge development, with particular emphasis on historical,
philosophical, positivist, and gendered and phenomenological ways of knowing. Emphasis is also
placed on having students develop their particular intellectual approach to disciplinary inquiry and on
formulating ideas for publications and presentations.
753. Evolving Nursing Science. (B) Sommers; Riegel.Prerequisite(s): NURS 750. For doctoral
students in nursing
A consideration of contemporary nursing research as it pertains to the current state of the art and
directions for future study. Advanced analysis of methodology, assumptions, and theoretical structures
that underpin the work.
754. Quantitative Research Design and Methods. (B) Pinto-Martin; Meghani.Prerequisite(s):
Students must have completed at least one doctoral-level statistics course. The current doctoral
recommendations include: SOCI 535; SOCI 536; STAT 500; STAT 501; PUBH 501; EPID 524; EPID
525. Please contact course faculty for permission for courses taken outside of the above
recommendations. For doctoral students in nursing.
This one semester survey course provides an overview of quantitative clinical research design and
methods. Ethical and legal considerations in human subjects research, access to patient populations,
sampling designs and power analysis, experimental and non-experimental designs, measurement of
variables, data collection techniques, and data management are included. This course is intended for
doctoral students in the health sciences.
L/R 764. Advanced Technologies & Clinical Decisions in Acute Care. (A) Becker; Griffith;
Bartke.Prerequisite(s): NURS 607, 657.
This fieldwork course focuses on development of a systematic approach to advanced physical
assessment, the use of diagnostic technologies and the development of a diagnostic reasoning as it
applies to patient management of the acutely ill and injured. Emphasis is placed on development of
competence to perform a comprehensive history and decision making for the management of acutely
ill patients.
768. Role of the Clinical Nurse Specialist. (A) Becker; Pawlow; Fisher.
This clinical course provides students the opportunity to apply CNS theory to practice and enables
students to develop strategies to overcome barriers to safe, quality healthcare delivery. Students
acquire knowledge and skills characteristic of CNS practice particularly as it relates to clinical
judgment, facilitation of learning, advocacy and moral agency, caring practice and response to
diversity.

Page 37 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
769. Clinical Nurse Specialist Clinical I. (C) Becker; Dubendorf; Muller.Prerequisite(s): NURS 657.
Corequisite(s): NURS 768.
This clinical course provides students the opportunity to apply CNS theory to practice and enables
students to develop strategies to overcome barriers to safe, quality healthcare delivery. Students
acquire knowledge and skills characteristic of CNS practice particularly as it relates to clinical
judgment, facilitation of learning, advocacy and moral agency, caring practice and response to
diversity.
SM 775. Post-Masters Psychiatric Mental Health NP Clinical Practicum & Seminar. (L)
Cacchione; Josey; Mulligan; Leahy.Prerequisite(s): Masters degree in Psychiatric Mental Health
Advanced Practice Nursing and approval of Program Director. By Permission Only
This clinical course prepares individuals have completed a Psychiatric Mental Health Clinical Nurse
Specialist or an Adult Psychiatric Mental Health Nurse Practitioner program to meet the clinical
requirements for certification as a Family Psychiatric Mental Health Nurse Practitioner. This clinical
practicum and seminar will complement previous education in advanced practice Psychiatric Mental
Health nursing. The focus of the course is on skill development in therapeutic relationships with clients,
interviewing, assessing client strengths and needs for mental health services, selecting and
implementing interventions including psychopharmacologic agents, and maintaining a role in a mental
health setting which allows active collaboration with other health professionals. A minimum of 16
precepted practicum hours per week is required in a selected community or institutional setting and a
minimum of 250 total precepted clinical hours during the semester is required. In addition, there will be
on-campus seminars and individual and group supervision conference calls throughout the semester.
770. Clinical Nurse Specialist Clinical II. (L) Becker; Dubendorf; Muller.Prerequisite(s): NURS 657,
NURS 768, NURS 769. Also Offered in Summer 12 Week Session
This clinical course focuses on the application of CNS theory to practice. Students focus on furthering
the development of the knowledge and skills related to the core competencies of the CNS. Strategies
to improve provider and system issues related to the provision of care to the population of interest are
developed, implemented and evaluated. Developing leadership in the development of system-wide or
healthcare policy is promoted. Advocating for the individual, family, caregiver and population of interest
needs within the context of clinical practice and policy making is encouraged.
776. High Risk Neonate Theory II. (L) Verger; Steele.Prerequisite(s): NURS 731, 733. Corequisite(s):
NURS 777.
This course examines specific pathophysiological mechanisms which may result in body system
failure. Strategies for clinical management are examined based on a synthesis of biological,
behavioral, medical, pharmacological, and nursing knowledge. Theoretical analysis of the roles of the
advanced practitioner with critically ill patients is emphasized.
777. High Risk Neonatal Clinical II. (L) Verger; Steele.Prerequisite(s): NURS 731, 733. Corequisite
(s): NURS 776.
This clinical course is designed with emphasis on continued development of advanced clinical skills in
the care of critically ill children. Emphasis is placed on integration of the roles of the advanced
practitioner. This course adds to the student's previous knowledge and skills in advanced practice and
prepares them to manage care of critically ill children.

Page 38 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
778. High Risk Neonatal Clinical III. (L) Verger; Steele.Prerequisite(s): NURS 776, 777.
This clinical course is designed with emphasis on continued development of advanced clinical
decision-making skills in the care of critically ill children. Emphasis is placed on knowledge and skills
that allow the advanced practitioner to efficiently and effectively manage children who are dependent
upon or assisted by technological devices to carry out life processes.
780. Health Care of Women and Primary Care. (L) Grube; Nagtalon-Ramos. Corequisite(s): NURS
657.
The focus of this course is a clinical approach to primary care problems commonly encountered by
women in an ambulatory setting. This course provides the women's health care nurse practitioner and
midwifery student student with the knowledge and problem solving approach to assist individuals with
the most common health problems, including acute episodic illness as well as stable chronic disease.
The concepts of health promotion and health maintenance are integrated throughout the curriculum.
781. (NURS686) Well Women Health Care, Theory. (A) Durain; Grube; Nagtalon-Ramos.Prerequisite
(s): NURS 607, 657, 780. Corequisite(s): NURS 782.
This course focuses on the management and evaluation of physical, emotional, socio-cultural and
educational needs of gynecologic primary health care of women from adolescence through postmenopausal years. The content is directed at expanding the expertise of the student in in meeting the
primary women's health care needs in contemporary society. Social influences that have an impact on
women's lives are also explored.
782. Well Women Health Care, Clinical. (A) Durain; Grube; Nagtalon-Ramos.Prerequisite(s): NURS
607, 657, 780. Corequisite(s): NURS 781.
This clinical course further prepares students in understanding and developing the Women's Health
Care Nurse Practitioner and Nurse-Midwifery roles. This clinical course focuses on the management
and evaluation of physical, emotional, socio-cultural and educational needs of gynecologic primary
health care needs of women from adolescence through post-menopausal years. Emphasis is placed
on promoting and maintaining wellness, clinical decision making, systematic health interview, physical
assessment, interpretation of laboratory findings, and diagnosis and treatment of gynecological
problems.
783. Health Care of Childbearing Women, Theory. (B) Trout; Lewis, J.; Grube.Prerequisite(s): NURS
781, 782. Corequisite(s): NURS 784.
The antepartum course builds upon the well-woman health care course. The focus is management of
prenatal care for the childbearing family. Conceptual threads of public policy and ethics are integrated
within the content to help students to identify broader implications for prenatal care. Content includes
theory and practice related to nurse-midwifery/ nurse practitioner management of the normal pregnant
woman, and nurse-midwifery/ nurse practitioner management and strategies to reduce selected
obstetric complications.
786. Integration II: Midwifery Integration. (A) McCool; Reale.Prerequisite(s): NURS 783, 784.
Corequisite(s): NURS 785.
Intensive integration of theory and clinical practice in women's health care with emphasis on
intrapartum, postpartum, and newborn care. Clinical practice during the intrapartum and postpartum,
teaching rounds, case presentations, and seminars with professional colleagues.

Page 39 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
784. Health Care of Childbearing Women, Clinical. (B) Trout; Lewis, J.; Grube.Prerequisite(s):
NURS 781, 782. Corequisite(s): NURS 783.
This course focuses on the management and evaluation of the childbearing women and their families
in primary care settings. The course presents the opportunity to implement the role of the Nurse
Practitioner with the childbearing woman and her family. The focus is on comprehensive physical,
psychosocial and educational management of women and their families during pregnancy and
postpartum.
785. Integration I. (L) Stringer; McCool; Reale; Nagtalon-Ramos.Prerequisite(s): NURS 783, 784.
Intensive integration of theory and clinical practice in women's health care with emphasis on
ambulatory care. Clinical practice in all areas of ambulatory women's health care, teaching rounds,
case presentations, and seminars with professional colleagues.
787. Intrapartum / Postpartum / Newborn Care, Theory. (L) McCool; Reale ; Stringer.Prerequisite(s):
NURS 783, 784. Corequisite(s): NURS 788.
Anatomy and physiology relevant to the care of the women and their families during the intrapartum,
postpartum and newborn periods. Includes management of selected obstetrical emergencies and
medical complications.
788. Intrapartum / Postpartum / Newborn Care, Clinical. (L) McCool; Reale.
Clinical care and management of women, newborns and their families during the intrapartum,
postpartum and newborn periods. Includes management of selected obstetrical emergencies and
medical complications. Clinical assignments related to module objectives.
SM 791. Clinical Fieldwork in Nurse Anesthesia Practice I. (A) Magro; Lynn; Briel.
This course provides students the opportunity to integrate theory into practice within the clinical
setting. The focus is on the development of diagnostic, therapeutic, ethical and cultural judgments with
the perioperative patient. Students progress from the care of healthy patients undergoing minimally
invasive surgical procedures to the more complex patient with multiple health issues. The student
begins to develop an advanced practice nursing role that integrates role theory, nursing theory, and
research knowledge through weekly seminars. Scope of practice, role development and nursing
interventions will be introduced and explored in the classroom, and principles will be applied in the
clinical practicum.
SM 792. Clinical Fieldwork in Nurse Anesthesia Practice II. (B) Magro; Lynn; Briel.Prerequisite(s):
NURS 791.
This course provides the opportunity for students to integrate theoretical knowledge and research
finding into practice within the clinical setting. Students progress by providing anesthesia care for
patients with more complex health problems. Techniques for managing the acute pain of clients are
emphasized. Anesthetic requirements as dictated by patient assessment including the surgical
procedure are studied in greater depth. The student now possesses the ability to combine theories
and skills in selected clinical situations. The guidance of CRNA faculty preceptors contributes to the
development of the student's critical thinking.

Page 40 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
SM 793. Clinical Fieldwork in Nurse Anesthesia Practice III. (L) Magro; Lynn; Briel.Prerequisite(s):
NURS 792. 12 Week Summer Session
This course focuses on the delivery of anesthesia care within advanced nursing practice in a broad
range of clinical situations for patients with multiple, complex health problems. Through refinement of
asssessment and management skills, critical thinking is further developed. Students progress by
providing anesthesia care for special populations of patients with simple and complex health problems.
The guidance of CRNA faculty preceptors contributes to the development of the student's critical
thinking. Collaborative practice within a care team model is emphasized and with supervision, the
student assumes more overall responsibility for the quality of care for the patients throughout the
perioperative experience.
SM 794. Nurse Anesthesia Residency I. (A) Magro; Lynn; Briel.Prerequisite(s): NURS 793.
This course is the first of two residencies that provide the nurse anesthetist student the opportunity to
attain competencies within the Certified Registered Nurse Anesthesia (CRNA) scope of practice.
Throughout the residency, the nurse anesthesia resident will utilize appropriate clinical judgment to
manage the complex medical, physical and psychosocial needs of clients in the perioperative phases.
Further refinement of the patient assessment, anesthesia administration, and critical thinking skills is
emphasized. Students progress by providing anesthesia care for patients throughout the continuum of
health care services. The guidance of CRNA faculty preceptors contributes to the development of the
independence of the CRNA student. Collaborative practice within a care team model is emphasized
and the student assumes more overall responsibility for the quality of care for the patients throughout
the perioperative experience, with clinical support as required.
SM 798. Adult Gerontology Acute Care NP: Professional Role & Clinical Practicum for Primary
Care Prepared Providers. (C) Becker.Prerequisite(s): NURS 796 completion. For Streamlined Adult
Gero Program Students Only
This online didactic course and accompanying clinical fieldwork focuses on issues essential to the
implementation of the role of the Adult Gerontology Acute Care Nurse Practitioner. Clinical fieldwork
focuses on the unique assessment, diagnosis, management and evaluation of acutely, critically and
complex chronically-ill adults, across the adult age continuum, experiencing acute, urgent and
emergent conditions, using both physiologically and technologically derived data. Evaluating for
physiologic instability and potential life-threatening conditions is emphasized. Attention is given to the
typical and atypical presentation of syndromes and constellation of symptoms exhibited by adults and
older adults experiencing complex acute, critical and complex chronic illness. Issues related to the
transition of patients through the health care system are explored. Collaboration between the nurse
practitioner, patient, family and interprofessional healthcare team are encouraged.
SM 795. Nurse Anesthesia Residency II. (B) Magro; Lynn; Briel.Prerequisite(s): NURS 794.
This course is the second of two residencies that provide the nurse anesthetist student the opportunity
to attain competencies within the Certified Registered Nurse Anesthesia (CRNA) scope of practice.
Throughout the residency, the nurse anesthesia resident will utilize appropriate clinical judgment to
manage the complex medical, physical and psychosocial needs of clients in the perioperative phases.
Further refinement of the patient assessment, anesthesia administration, and critical thinking skills is
emphasized. Students progress by providing anesthesia care for patients throughout the continuum of
health care services. The guidance of CRNA faculty preceptors contributes to the development of the
independence of the CRNA student. Collaborative practice within a care team model is emphasized
and the student assumes more overall responsibility for the quality of care for the patients throughout
the perioperative experience, with clinical support as required.

Page 41 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
796. Diagnosis and Management of Adult Gerontology Acute Care Patients I. (A) Becker. For
Streamlined Adult Gero Program Students Only
This on-line, didactic course is designed for the practicing nurse practitioner or clinical nurse specialist
who seeks to gain additional knowledge and skills related to the care of adult gerontology acutely ill
patients with a specific focus on cardiovascular and pulmonary systems, thoracic issues, infectious
processes, wound healing and diabetes. Particular focus is placed on specific issues related to the
older adult such as frailty, dehydration, loss of functional mobility, falls, and other geriatric
syndromes.The basics of ECG, CXR and PFT interpretation, ABG analysis and ventilator modes are
highlighted. This course examines the epidemiologic, assessment, diagnostic, management and
evaluation of acutely or critically ill adults across the adult-older adult age spectrum. An evidencebased approach to nursing and medical management including pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic modalities is emphasized.
797. Diagnosis and Management of Adult Gerontology Acute Care Patients II. (B) Becker. For
Streamlined Adult Gero Program Students Only
This online didactic course, designed for the practicing nurse practitioners or clinical nurse specialists
seeking to gain knowledge and skills relative to care of adult gerontology acute care patients, focuses
on the medical and surgical issues of the neurological, renal, gastrointestinal, hematological,
oncologic and orthopedic systems. This course examines the epidemiology, assessment, diagnosis,
management and evaluation of acutely or critically ill adults across the adult-older adult age spectrum.
An evidence-based, interprofessional team approach to the nursing and medical management of
patients is emphasized.
799. MSN Clinical Remediation. (M)
Students whose clinical performance would benefit from additional clinical exposure in order to
demonstrate the expected competencies are, with course faculty and faculty advisor approval, eligible
to register for NURS 799. This experience will be allotted no more than one credit unit and must be
completed in a time frame not to exceed one academic semester. A course may be remediated only
one time.
SM 800. Dissertation Seminar I. (A) Bowles, K.; Lake.Prerequisite(s): NURS 750, 753, 754, 813, 2
semesters of Statistics, plus six concentration courses. For doctoral students in nursing
Advanced study and research in nursing leading to the completion of the dissertation proposal.
SM 814. Doctoral Seminar: Ethics and Nursing. (K) Deatrick. For doctoral students in nursing
A critical review of the theoretical and empirical literature dealing with bioethics, nursing ethics, moral
development, women's ethics and specific ethical concerns in health and illness care. Students will
study topics relate to their own interests/needs, guided by the instructor in relation to the discipline of
ethics.

Page 42 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
SM 803. Clinical Scholars in the Discipline of Nursing. (E) Clinican Educators from the Standing
Faculty.Prerequisite(s): Selection as a Hillman Scholar in Nursing Innovation or at the recommendation
of the student's PhD academic advisor. First Fall-Spring post-BSN semesters in the PhD program for
Hillman Scholars
This 2-semester course is designed to enhance the understanding of the practice of nursing as an
intellectual discipline for doctoral students who have limited clinical practice experience prior to
pursuing the PhD. It consists of individualized clinical experiences that are integrally related to the
student's area of research interest and which are facilitated by clinician guides in a variety of settings.
Students actively participate in seminars that focus on examining the health needs of individuals and
vulnerable patients, the praxis of nursing and its place within the complex health care delivery system,
health policy and society at large. Research informing practice and practice informing research are
highlighted using the clinical practice experiences as case exemplars.
NURS 803 is a course designed specifically for two groups of PhD students: the Hillman Scholars in
Nursing Innovation and post-baccalaureate students completing an MS in passing who have limited
clinical experience as a professional nurse. This course is designed to expose students to carefully
selected clinical experiences that provide opportunities to build a clinical appreciation of the practice of
nursing as an intellectual discipline, to gain an enhanced understanding of the health care delivery
system, and to examine the intersection of research, policy, and practice at the frontlines of nursing
practice. To this end, this course combines the clinical experiences with a weekly seminar facilitated to
dissect common issues experienced by vulnerable patients and families across care settings and
specialties, to critically examine the contributions of nursing science to that care, and to examine how
the health care system contributes or detracts from optimal care.
SM 811. Historical Thought in Nursing. (B) Fairman. For doctoral students in nursing
A seminar open to enrolled doctoral students who plan to conduct historical research as some aspect
of their program. Meets for one semester on a schedule determined by participants and faculty.
SM 813. Qualitative Paradigm Empirical Nursing Research. (A) Deatrick.Prerequisite(s): NURS
750. For doctoral students in nursing
Study of selected qualitative paradigm empirical research approaches, including design and
methodology. Critique of selected qualitative research reports from the literature of nursing and related
disciplines. Fieldwork exercise and research proposal required.
SM 817. Theoretical Perspectives of Growth and Development: A Health Care Perspective. (A)
Medoff-Cooper; Deatrick; Lipman; O'Sullivan.
This seminar will explore issues related to the theoretical perspectives of growth and development
during childhood. Areas of emphasis will include: methodological issues related to research of
childhood growth and development, the analysis of developmental data, and measurement issues
common to research of development. Included in the discussion will be an analysis of theories in
relationship to research of childhood development. The seminar will conclude with an agenda for
future directions of research of growth and development.
SM 818. Families and Research. (J) Deatrick. For doctoral students in nursing
This seminar will explore issues related to research of families. Included in the ongoing discussion will
be an analysis of nursing and other theories in relationship to research of families. Methodological
issues related to research of families will be discussed, as will the analysis of family data and
measurement issues common to research of families. The seminar will conclude with an agenda for
future directions to research of families.

Page 43 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
SM 819. Seminar on the Social History of Nursing. Fairman. For doctoral students in nursing
This course will involve a guided review of the pertinent literature relating to the history of technology
in 20th century America. The focus will include a critical examination and review of the social origins
and implications of technological development and diffusion in healthcare. Various theoretical
frameworks in the history of technology will be closely examined in attempt to assist the student in the
development of their own framework.
SM 821. (SOCI821) Proseminar in Health Outcomes Research. (K) Lake; Aiken.Prerequisite(s):
Prior coursework at undergraduate or masters level in statistics and quantitative methods.
This the first of a two-course sequence designed for doctoral students interested in conducting health
outcomes research. The first course (821) focuses on conceptual, methodological, statistical, feasibility
and data issues central to the conduct of health outcomes research; the second course (822) focuses
on applying health outcomes research through the development and implementation of a research
project. In the first course Penn faculty researchers will use their ongoing studies to illustrate how
study design, sampling, measurement, and advanced statistical techniques can be employed to
address the various challenges inherent in health outcomes research. In the second course, students
will design and implement a health outcomes research project.
SM 825. Proseminar on Integrative Science in Aging. (B) Cacchione; Ersek. For Doctoral Students
Only
SM 822. (SOCI822) Applications of Health Outcome Research. (C) Aiken.Prerequisite(s): Prior
coursework at undergraduate or masters level in statistics and quantitative methods, Nursing 821/
Sociology 821 is preferred.
This the second of a two-course sequence designed for doctoral students interested in conducting
health outcomes research. The first course (821) focuses on conceptual, methodological,statistical,
feasibility and data issues central to the conduct of health outcomes research; the second course
(822) focuses on applying health outcomes research through the development and implementation of
a research project. In the first course Penn faculty researchers will use their ongoing studies to
illustrate how sampling, study design, measurement , and advanced statistical techniques can be
employed to address the various challenges inherent in health outcomes research. In the second
course, students will design and implement a health outcomes research project.

Page 44 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
SM 823. (PUBH539) Designing Interventions to Promote Health and Reduce Health Disparities.
(K) Jemmott; Teitelman. Doctoral Students Only
Advanced analysis, design and evaluation of interventions to promote health and reduce health
disparities with a focus on underserved ulnerable minority or ethnic populations, through culturally
competent research, education and clinical practice. Areas to be evaluated include: -- Health
disparities as it relates to health promotion and disease prevention behavioral intervention research in
vulnerable communities -- Concepts of marginalization, race, ethnicity, class, gender and culture as it
relates to health disparities -- Social-psychological theoretical and research approaches related to
developing culturally congruent health promotion interventions to reduce health disparities for
vulnerable populations -- The use of elicitation, focus groups and ethnographic techniques to tailor
health behavior theory to meet the needs of the population -- Culturally competent research
methodologies, involving education and/or clinical practice, e.g. culturally competent measures,
recruitment, retention, and informed consent in hard to reach populations
-- Community participatory research as a strategy for working with the community to build research
partnership and build capacity for sustained health promotion initiatives -- Health promotion
intervention strategies for reducing health disparities in vulnerable communities -- Strategies to
evaluate the effectiveness of interventions using randomized controlled trials (RCTs) in community
and clinical settings -- Strategies for tailoring successful evidenced-based health promotion
interventions to a variety of different populations for use in clinical trials and community settings -Examine approaches for the translating and disseminating evidenced-based intervention research
SM 824. Health Equity: Conceptual, Linguistic, Methodological, and Ethical Issues. (I) Sommers.
For Doctoral Students Only
The course focuses on advanced analysis and evaluation of theories, concepts, and methods related
to health equity. Topic areas include models and frameworks of health equity; linguistic choices related
to equity, disparity, and vulnerability; role of economics, class, gender, sex, sexuality, race, and
ethnicity; health equity in special populations; and issues in health policy, research ethics, and
research methods. Emphasis is on advanced discourse and analysis of health equity theory and
research.
SM 826. Advanced Qualitative Research Methods. (B) Kagan. For Doctoral Students Only
The course extends beginning qualitative research methods skills to a more advanced level. Students
planning a dissertation or career focus in qualitative or mixed methods may use the course to refine
interest and skill. The focus of the course centers on interactionist perspectives and collective analysis
though methods tangential to these perspectives. Standpoint and participatory methods and analysis
may be considered given sufficient student interest. Students are actively involved in selection and
critique of seminal and critical readings. Students must have at their disposal a suitable dataset with
commensurate permissions or have plans to collect qualitative data amenable to analysis during the
course term. This data base can be from previous research proposals and fieldwork can be used as
the building blocks for the course assignment(s). The course will focus on data collection, analyses,
interpretation, and presentation of results. Skill building will center on collection and management of
data; analytic technique including comparative, narrative, and text analysis; development and
management of coding schemas; abstraction and development of situation specific theory; and
dissemination and diffusion of findings, theories, and relevance to similar phenomena and use in
practice.
SM 827. Self-Care of Chronic Illness. (M) Riegel. For PhD Students Only
This course introduces the history, definitions, predictors, measurement, and outcomes of self-care in
chronic illness. Historical, classic and current literature from various disciplines will be studied to give
students a broadened perspective of the self-care construct and the issues that patients face when
dealing with chronic illness.

Page 45 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
831. Advanced Topics in Health Informatics. (B) Bowles.Prerequisite(s): NURS 651, NURS 551,
SYS 528, or permission of instructor.
This course is designed to survey a broad range of advanced topics in the field of health informatics.
Course faculty and invited speakers will provide the content for weekly meetings conducted in a
blended environment (both on-line and in the classroom). Each week, students will listen to a lecture
and then participate in a group discussion. Approximately half of these lecture/discussion sessions will
take place in a a "live" classroom, while the remainder will be available asynchronously in an online
setting (i.e. using Blackboard). There will be no textbook, however each speaker will provide links to
web-based resources that provide either background information or further elaboration of their topic. A
group of students (depending upon size of class, probably 2-3 per topic) will take the lead for each
topic, communicating with the speaker and facilitating the class discussion. As a final project, these
student groups will also develop a more complete web resource for their selected topic.
SM 828. Response to Chronic Illness: Theory and Research. (A) Riegel.Prerequisite(s): Permission
of faculty.
Millions of people of all ages live with chronic illness(es). A diagnosis of a chronic illness is a lifechanging event, causing disruption and a sense of loss for many. Common early responses are stress,
anxiety, depression, fear, and anger. Over time, with support and experience with the illness, many
adjust. But, others report persistent feelings of loss due to physical, emotional, spiritual/existential,
social, occupational, and/or financial influences of chronic illness. Those who adjust the best typically
find a way to return a sense of normalcy to their lives. Loved ones and caregivers are equally affected
by chronic illness and much has been written in recent years about caregiver burden. However, some
individuals (caregivers and patients) report positive responses to illness, including a deepened
purpose for living and a reordering of life priorities.
The focus of this course is on individual responses to chronic illness- the person diagnosed and his/
her loved ones. This course is intended to complement N818, which focuses on families and dyads
dealing with chronic illness. In this course we will explore the major theoretical perspectives that
underlie this field. The literature describing common responses of both those diagnosed and their
loved ones as well as the social and cultural context that helps explain the responses of individuals
facing chronic illness will be examined. Methods used to study chronic illness will be explored in depth.
SM 829. Measurement of Physiologic Variables Related to Health Outcome Disparity. (H)
Sommers. For Pre-Doctoral and Post-Doctoral students interested in describing health disparities and
developing and testing interventions in vulnerable women, children, and families.
This graduate course is an advanced exploration of biometric methods (branch of science that
includes the measurement of physiological variables and parameters) and their use in quantitative
research. A particular focus will be on biological measures that can be used as outcome variables to
evaluate interventions to promote health and health equity, and reduce health outcome disparities in
vulnerable or marginalized populations.
Areas to be evaluated include: * Measurement theory and instrument science as they relate to
biological signals; role of biometrics in health outcome disparities research * Ethical considerations
and how they relate to biometrics; mitigating perceived threats (profiling, stereotyping); the role of
human subjects considerations; the responsible conduct of research * Derivation and types of biologic
signals; time-based characteristics * Accuracy and precision of biologic measures; random and nonrandom error; application and exemplars of strategies to determine accuracy and precision * Role of
biological rhythms in biometric measurement; analysis of multiple data points and repeated measures
of biological variables * Methods relative to vulnerable women, children, and families: genetics;
environmental contaminants; digital image analysis; hormones, metabolites; drugs and alcohol

Page 46 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
SM 830. (GSWS830) Conducting Research in Global Women's Health. (A) Teitelman.Prerequisite
(s): Completion of course in global health (this may include a reputable online course eg: Coursera), or
equivalent background (eg. global health field experience). Permission of Instructor. For graduate and
professional students from any field with an interest in global women's health; Masters students by
permission of instructor.
An introduction to theoretical and methodological issues as they relate to conducting research in
global women's health. Advanced analysis of historical, social, cultural, economic, political,
technological and geographical contexts as they influence the health of girls and women across the
lifespan and thier relation to health care systems as both clients and providers. This includes
contextual issues that constrain the provisiond & receipt of adequate healthcare.
A critical examination of theoretical and methodological issues pertaining to research on women
and girls condcuted around the world across disciplines. A focused and intenstive exploration of place
as it pertains to women and girls formal and informal structors of health care delivery as those
needing and/or seeking health care, and as those providing health care to others. Students will
examine the multiple dimensions and qualities of these endeavors (e.g. activity, power, control,
visibility, value, and remuneration) and the intersection of gender and health - locally, globally and
across borders. Students will focus thier examination on the implicaitons of seeking and providing
health care for women's and girls' health and well-being. By examining issues in local and global
contexts and across geographical boundaries, students will have the opportunity to challenge
gendered, class, political, and cultural assumptions related to women's health.
SM 837. Web-based Research Methodology. (A) Im.Prerequisite(s): Enrollment in a Doctoral
Program.
This doctoral elective course will provide an introduction to Web-based research methods in healthrelated disciplines. This course will examine research methods that have been adapted to the study of
human subjects through the Web. This course will have particular emphasis on quantitative and
qualitative empirical methods using the Web as a data collection medium. Another important feature of
this course will be intensive analysis of ethical and methodological issues conducting research
through the Web. Areas to be analyzed include: types of Web-based research; advantages and
disadvantages of Web-based research; vehicles (e.g. funding, mentoring) that have supported Webbased research; human subject protection issues; issues/concerns in recruitment and data collection
in Web-based research; and professional vehicles (e.g. scholarly publication, lay publications,
speaking forums) that have helped disseminate the knowledge derived from Web-based research.
SM 832. Laboratory Based Biological Measures. (A) Libonati; Muthukumaran.Prerequisite(s):
Biology, Chemistry, Physiology, and Permission of Instructor. For Doctoral and Post-Doctoral students
interested in biobehavioral research laboratory techniques.
This graduate course is an advanced, mentored exploration of biological measurement techniques
used in nursing research. This course will provide an opportunity to gain a broad-based understanding
of laboratory methodology, biomarkers, and translational research. Concepts of biological sample
processing, storage, quality assurance and control and analysis will be covered. Laboratory
measurements with a focus on genetic regulation of biomarkers related to stress, pain, and sleep/
fatigue will be covered.

Page 47 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}
SM 833. Measurement of Health-Related Behavior and Determinants. Karen Glanz.Prerequisite(s):
This one semester seminar will provide a detailed overview of measurement of health-related
behaviors and determinants of behavior. The course will cover ccharacteristics of measures, data
collection, and how to apply the science of measurement to specific health research questions. The
course will emphasize This one semester seminar will provide a detailed overview of measurement of
hethe intersection of self-report measures with biological and physical measures,and the use of newer
technologies to collect data and improve data quality. Students will integrate concepts and topics
covered in the course as they work on a measurement project in their specific area(s) of interest and
engage in problem-solving with their peers. This course is intended for doctoral studentand advanced
masters-level students in the health sciences.
SM 836. Patient-Reported Symptoms & Outcomes for Clinical Research. (A) Richmond.
Patient-reported symptoms and outcomes are central to health science and have assumed increasing
importance in the broader research arena. The research goal, conceptual clarity of variables,
participant characteristics, instrument psychometrics, degree of coarseness/specificity, and participant
burden are all essential to consider in selecting patient-reported symptom and outcome measures.
This course focuses on linking study needs, design considerations, theoretical concepts, empirical
measures, data collection strategies, and analytic approaches to patient-reported symptoms and
outcomes for clinical research. Specific symptoms and outcomes examined in detail may include
functional status, quality of life, health status, well-being, sleep, fatigue, weight, pain, shortness of
breath, depression, stress, and nausea but each semester will be tailored to the research interests of
the seminar participants.
890. Nursing Doctoral Teaching Residency. (A) Designated Member of the School of Nursing Grad
Group. For Nursing Doctoral Students Only
The purpose of this required one semester teaching residency is to enhance the expertise of students
in the role of educator. The residency will be tailored to the student's individual learning needs. At the
minimum, students with no or minimal prior teaching experience will gain a beginning level of expertise
in course planning, course evaluation, dealing with difficult student situations, test construction, paper
assignment construction and grading, content delivery methods, as well as other aspects of the faculty
teaching role. Students with more extensive teaching experience will tailor their residences with their
residency supervisor to enhance their expertise in these various areas.
897. Nursing Doctoral Research Residency. (A) Designated Member of the School of Nursing Grad
Group. For Nursing Doctoral Students Only
The purpose of this required one semester research residency is to enhance student research training
early in the doctoral program by providing a mentored research experience. The residency is designed
to be a tailored hands-on experience to provide students with exposure and the opportunity to
participate in one or more aspects of an on-going research project. Research residencies are
experiential activities designed to meet the student's individual learning needs. At the minimum,
students with no or minimal prior research experience will gain a beginning level of experience on a
variety of components of an ongoing research project. Students with more extensive research
experience will tailor their residences with their residency supervisor to enhance their expertise in
these various areas.
900. Directed Study. (C)
Must be arranged with the written permission of the sponsoring faculty member prior to registration.
995. Dissertation. (C)
Dissertation General Tuition

Page 48 of 49

NURSING
(NU) {NURS}

Page 49 of 49

