OPERATIONS,INFORMATION AND DECISIONS
(WH) {OIDD}
L/R 101. An Introduction to Operations, Information and Decisions. (C) Staff.
OIDD 101 explores a variety of common quantitative modeling problems that arise frequently in
business settings, and discusses how they can be formally modeled and solved with a combination of
business insight and computer-based tools. The key topics covered include capacity management,
service operations, inventory control, structured decision making, constrained optimization and
simulation. This course teaches how to model complex business situations and how to master tools to
improve business performance. The goal is to provide a set of foundational skills useful for future
coursework atWharton as well as providing an overview of problems and techniques that characterize
disciplines that comprise Operations and Information Management.
105. Developing Tools for Data Access and Analysis (VBA and SQL Programming).
This course provides an introduction to the construction of data analysis tools that are commonly used
for business applications, especially in consulting and finance. The course builds on the spreadsheet
and analytical skills developed in OPIM101, providing a much more extensive treatment of
spreadsheet application development and database management. The first portion of the course will
focus on programming in VBA, the embedded programming language in the Microsoft Office suite of
applications. This will be supplemented with discussion of industry best practice in software
development, such as specification development, interface design, documentation, and testing. The
second portion of the class will emphasize data access and analysis utilizing SQL, the industry
standard language for interacting with database software.
210. Management Information Systems. (C) Staff.
This course provides a broad-based introduction to the management of information technology
focusing on three interrelated themes: technology, organization, and strategy. The goal of this course is
to equip students with the knowledge and tools to utilize information systems to pursue a firm's
strategic and organizational goals. The course has no prerequisites other than a general interest in the
applications of information technology.
221. (ESE 522) Operations Strategy and Process Management. (C) Staff. Cross listed with ESE
522
This course examines how organizations can develop and leverage excellence in process
management. The first module focuses on operations strategy. In these classes, we examine what
constitutes an operations strategy and how organizations can create value by managing complexity,
uncertainty, and product development. In the second half of the course, we discuss recent
developments in both manufacturing and service industries. Specifically, we examine initiatives in
quality, lean manufacturing and enterprise-wide planning systems. The course is recommended for
those interested in consulting or operations careers, as well as students with an engineering
background who wish to develop a better understanding of managing production processes.
222. (LGST222) Internet Law & Policy. (C) Staff. cross listed with LGST 222
The Internet has become central to business and daily life. This course looks at how courts,
legislatures, and regulators confront the major legal issues that the Internet poses. The fundamental
challenge is that law comes from governments and other institutions in specific places, but the Internet
is global and virtual. Conflicts such as the shutdown of the Napster peer-to-peer file-sharing service
and the debate over "network neutrality" regulations for broadband access illustrate the challenge.
How does the legal system think about Google, Skype, Twitter, and Facebook? How should it?
223. Service Operations Management. (C) Staff.
240. (LGST240) Gamification for Business.

Page 1 of 17

OPERATIONS,INFORMATION AND DECISIONS
(WH) {OIDD}
261. (BEPP261, BEPP761, BEPP961, ESE 567, OIDD761) Risk Analysis and Environmental
Management. (C) Kunreuther. Crosslisted with OPIM 761, BPUB 261, 761, 961, and ESE 567. See
description under OPIM 761.
For Spring 2015 - If Risk Analy & Env Mgmt is closed after the pre-registration period, please e-mail
Kyle Dix at kyledix@wharton.upenn.edu to be added to the wait list for the class. Please be sure to
include your Name, Student ID #, what section you are interested in (OPIM, BPUB, or ESE) and list
what class level you are in. We will do our best to accomodate as many students as possible on the
wait list.
263. (BEPP263) Environmental & Energy Economics and Policy. Arthur van Benthem.
This course examines environmental and energy issues from an economist's perspective. Over the
last several decades, energy markets have become some of the most dynamic markets of the world
economy, as they experienced a shift from heavy regulation to market-driven incentives. First we look
at scarcity pricing and market power in electricity and gasoline markets. We then study oil and gas
markets, with an emphasis on optimal extraction and pricing, and geopolitical risks that investors in
hyrocarbon resources face. We then shift gears to the sources of environmental problems (many of
which are energy-related), and policy makers can intervene to solve some of these problems. We talk
about the economic rationale for a broad range of possible policies: environmental taxes, subsidies,
performance standards and cap-and-trade. In doing so, we discuss fundamentalconcepts in
environmental economics such as externalities, valuation of the environment and the challenge of
designing international agreements. At the end of the course, there will be special attention for the
economics and finance of renewable energy and policies to foster its growth. Finally, we discuss the
transportation sector, and anaylze heavily debated policies such as fuel-economy standards and
subsidies for green vehicles.
290. Decision Processes. Prerequisite(s): STAT 101 or equivalent strongly recommended.
This course is an intensive introduction to various scientific perspectives on the processes through
which people make decisions. Perspectives covered include cognitive psychology of human problemsolving, judgment and choice, theories of rational judgment and decision, and the mathematical theory
of games. Much of the material is technically rigorous. Prior or current enrollment in STAT 101 or the
equivalent, although not required, is strongly recommended.
291. (LGST206, MGMT291, OIDD691) Negotiations. (C)
Negotiation is the art and the science of creating good agreements between two or more parties. This
course develops managerial negotiation skills by mixing lectures and practice, using cases and
exercises in which students negotiate with each other. The cases cover a wide range of problems and
settings: one-shot deals between individuals, repeated negotiations, negotiations over several issues,
and negotiations among several parties (both within and between organizations). Class participation
and case studies account for half the course grade. Students will also write about a negotiation
experience outside of class.
292. (LGST292, MGMT292) Adv Topics Negotiation..
This course is designed to teach negotiation principles and to enable students to develop their
negotiation skills. This course builds upon and assumes familiarity with the negotiation concepts
covered in the prerequisite for this course: "Negotiations." In this course, we extend the study and
practice of negotiations, and we develop a deeper understanding of how specific aspects of the
negotiation process impact outcomes. Through course lectures, readings, and exercises, students will
develop a rich framework for thinking about the negotiation process and acquire tools for guiding the
negotiation process.

Page 2 of 17

OPERATIONS,INFORMATION AND DECISIONS
(WH) {OIDD}
299. JUDG & DEC MAKING RES IM. (A)
This class provides a high-level introduction to the field of judgment and decision making (JDM) and
in-depth exposure to the process of doing research in this area. Throughout the semester you will gain
hands-on experience with several different JDM research projects. You will be paired with a PhD
student or faculty mentor who is working on a variety of different research studies. Each week you will
be given assignments that are central to one or more of these studies, and you will be given detailed
descriptions of the research projects you are contributing to and how your assignments relate to the
successful completion of these projects. To complement your hands-on research experience,
throughout the semester you will be assigned readings from the book Nudge by Thaler and Sunstein,
which summarizes key recent ideas in the JDM literature. You will also meet as a group for an hour
once every three weeks with the class's faculty supervisor and all of his or her PhD students to
discuss the projects you are working on, to discuss the class readings, and to discuss your own
research ideas stimulated by getting involved in various projects. Date and time to be mutually agreed
upon by supervising faculty and students. the 1CU version of this course will involve approx. 10 hours
of research immersion per week and a 10-page paper. The
0.5 CU version of this course will involve approx 5 hours of research immersion per week and a 5page final paper. Please contact Katy Milkman if you are interested in enrolling in this course:
kmilkman@wharton.upenn.edu
311. Business Computer Languages. (C)
This course is taught with the more descriptive title of "Scripting for Business Analytics." "Business
Analytics" refers to modeling and analysis undertaken for purposes of management and supporting
decision making. The varieties of techniques and methods are numerous and growing, including
simple equational models, constrained optimization models, probabilistic models, visualization, data
analysis, and much more. Elementary modeling of this sort can be undertaken in Excel and other
spreadsheet programs, but "industrial strength" applications typically use more sophisticated tools,
based on scripting languages. Scripting languages are programming languages that are designed to
be learned easily and to be used for special purposes, rather than for large-scale application
programming. This course focuses on the special purposes associated with business analytics and
teaches MATLAB and Python in this context. MATLAB and Python are widely used in practice (both in
management and in engineering), as are the business analytic methods covered in the course. Prior
programming experience is useful, but not required or presumed for this course.
314. (OIDD662) Enabling Technologies. (C) Staff.
Conducting business in a networked economy invariably involves interplay with technology. The
purpose of this course is to improve understanding of technology (what it can or cannot enable) and
the business drivers of technology-related decisions in firms. We will be discussing some of the new
and most disruptive technologies right now to stimulate thought on new applications for commerce and
new ventures, as well as their implications to the tech industry as a whole. Topics include social media,
online advertising, big data, and cloud computing.
The course will take a layered approach (from network infrastructure) to data infrastructure to
applications infrastructure, or direct enablers of commerce) to first, understanding and then, thinking
about technology enablers. Network infrastructure layers include fundamentals of wired and wireless
infrastructure technologies such as protocols for networking, broadband technologies - for last (DSL,
Cable etc) and other miles (advances in optical networking) and digital cellular communications. Data
infrastructure layers include usage tracking technologies, search technologies and data mining. Direct
application layers include personalization technologies (CRM), design technologies for content and
exchanges, software renting enablers, application service provision, agents and security mechanisms.
Finally some emberging technology enablers (such as bluetooth, biometrics and virtual reality) are
identified and discussed.

Page 3 of 17

OPERATIONS,INFORMATION AND DECISIONS
(WH) {OIDD}
321. Introduction to Management Science. (C) Staff.
Understanding how to use data and business analytics can be the key differential for a company's
success or failure. This course is designed to introduce fundamental quantitative decisionmaking tools
for a broad range of managerial decision problems. Topics covered include linear, nonlinear, and
discrete optimization, dynamic programming, and simulation. Students will apply these quantitative
models in applications of portfolio management, electricity auctions, revenue management for airlines,
manufacturing, advertising budget allocation, and healthcare scheduling operations. Emphasis in this
course is placed on mathematical modeling of real world problems and implementation of decision
making tools.
315. Data Base Management Systems. (C) Staff.
Organizations continue to increase their reliance on computerized database management and
information retrieval systems. Whether purchasing airplane tickets, managing retail merchandise,
processing financial trades or simply sending email, data management defines the modern firm. This
course aimes to provide students with both a practical and theoretical introduction to the design,
implementation, and use of such systems. Students are introduced to the fundamental concepts and
principals of data management and gain practical experience by designing and deploying a working
system. Throughout the course, case studies are used to illustrate theoretical concepts while
acquainting students with innovative commercial uses of these systems.
316. (OIDD661) Systems Analysis, Design, and Implementation. (C) Staff.
At its surface this course introduces students to the management and technical issues associated with
planning and designing large-scale computer systems. It does so in part as an elaboration of Fred
Brooks's observation that "The technology, the surrounding organization, and the traditions of the craft
conspire to define certain items of paperwork." But if that were our only goal, we would soon find
ourselves mired in (and probably arguing about) the minutiae of how such paper items ought to be
constructed - not a very helpful pedagogical exercise. So then, at a deeper level we seek to
understand why the conspiracy endures, and why in spite of it, systems still take too long and cost too
much to build as a systems project's team members struggle to understand one another across
disparate discourse communities and world views, differences in experience and training, and over
long periods of time. More than anything else, within the context of working with the main tools and
techniques of systems analysis and design, this course treats communication, corroboration, and
thinking within the boundaries of a technology-oriented project as its primary subjects.
SM 319. Advanced Decision Systems: Evolutionary Computation. (C)
This course is taught with the more descriptive title of "Agents, Games, and Evolution." It explores
applications and fundamentals of strategic behavior. Strategic, or game-theoretic, topics arise
throughout the social sciences. The topics include--and we discuss--trust, cooperation, market-related
phenomena (including price equilibria and distribution of wealth), norms, conventions, commitment,
coalition formation, and negotiation. They also include such applied matters as design of logistics
systems, auctions, and markets generally (for example, markets for electric power generation). In
addressing these topics we focus on the practical problem of finding effective strategies for agents in
strategic situations (or games). Our method of exploration will be experimental: we review and discuss
experiments, principally computational experiments, on the behavior of boundedly rational agents in
strategic (or game-theoretic) situations. Course work includes readings, discussions in class
(organized as a seminar), examinations, and a course project on a topic chosen by the participants.

Page 4 of 17

OPERATIONS,INFORMATION AND DECISIONS
(WH) {OIDD}
325. (PHIL203) Computer Simulation Models. (C) Staff.
This course focuses on agent-based computational models in the social sciences, especially in
economic, in commercial and in strategic (game-theoretic) contexts. This relatively recent and now
rapidly-developing form of computer simulation seeks to explain and predict complex social
phenomena "from the ground up", through interactions of comparatively simple agents. The course
reviews experimental and theoretical results, and exposes the students to modern development
environments for this form of simulation. Students have the opportunity to design and implement
agent-based simulations. Programming, however, is not required. This course aims to integrate various
topics in agent-based simulation, while developing an appreciation of the problems that are particularly
characteristic of this form of simulation so that students will understand its promise and potential.
353. (OIDD653) MATH MDLNG APPL IN FNCE. (C) Tsoukalas.Prerequisite(s): OPIM321 (or a similar
optimization class).
Quantitative methods have become fundamental tools in the analysis and planning of financial
operations. There are many reasons for this development: the emergence of a whole range of new
complex financial instruments, innovations in securitization, the increased globalization of the financial
markets, the proliferation of information technology and the rise of high-frequency traders, etc. In this
course, models for hedging, asset allocation, and multi-period portfolio planning are developed,
implemented, and tested. In addition, pricing models for options, bonds, mortgage-backed securities,
and other derivatives are studied. The models typically require the tools of statistics, optimization, and/
or simulation, and they are implemented in spreadsheets or a high-level modeling environment,
MATLAB. This course is quantitative and will require extensive computer use. The course is intended
for students who have strong interest in finance. The objective is to provide students the necessary
practical tools they will require should they choose to join the financial services industry, particularly in
roles such as: derivatives, quantitative trading, portfolio management, structuring, financial
engineering, risk management, etc. Prospective students should be comfortable with quantitative
methods
such as basic statistics and the methodologies (mathematical programming and simulation) taugh
tin OPIM612 Business Analytics and OPIM321 Management Science (or equivalent). Students should
seek permission from the instructor if the background requirements are not met.
410. (OIDD672) Decision Support Systems. (C) Staff. Crosslisted with OPIM 672. See description
under OPIM 672.
397. (OIDD697) Retail Supply Chain Management. See description under OPIM 697

Page 5 of 17

OPERATIONS,INFORMATION AND DECISIONS
(WH) {OIDD}
398. (OIDD698) Retail Supply Chains..
The course will examine how retailers understand their customers' preferences and respond with
appropriate products through effective supply chain management. The course class sections will deal
with the following major items: (1) linking finance and operations in retailing, (2) what assortment of
products should a retailer carry in each store, (3) optimizing the inventory carried of each SKU in each
store, (4) markdown pricing, (5) store execution and (6) supply chain design. In addition, we will
consider a broad range of issues facing two retailers, Mothers Work, and Best Buy, when we are
visited by current and past senior executives from these firms.
The course is highly recommended for students interested in careers in: (1) Retailing and retail
supply chains, (2) Businesses like banking, consulting and information technology that provide
services to retail firms, (3) Manufacturing companies that sell their products through retail firms. Even
if you don't expect to work for a retailer, this course can be useful to you in two ways. First, because
retailers are such dominant players in many supply chains today, it is important that the processes
they follow be understood by manufacturers and distributors, or by the consultants and bankers that
service retailers and their suppliers. Second, the problems retailers face (e.g., making data accessible,
interpreting large amounts of data, reducing lead-times, eliciting the best efforts from employees, and
so forth), are shared by firms in many other industries. It's easier to understand these issues through
case studies in retailing because we all experience the industry as consumers and can readily relate
to chronic problems such as stock outs and markdowns.
The course will be highly interactive, using case discussions in more than half of the classes and
including senior retail executives in a number of the class sessions.
399. Supervised Study. (C) 1 c.u. By appointment
Decision science majors read and report on a bibliography of works in their field of specialization
provided by a faculty member.
412. Intro to Computer Programming.. (C)
415. (IPD 515, MEAM415) Product Design.
This course provides tools and methods for creating new products. The course is intended for students
with a strong career interest in new product development , entrepreneurship, and/or technology
development. The course follows an overall product design methodology, including the identification of
customer needs, generation of product concepts, prototyping, and design-for-manufacturing. Weekly
student assignments are focused on the design of a new product and culminate in the creation of a
prototype. The course is open to juniors and seniors in SEAS or Wharton.
416. (IPD 517) Design and Development of Web-Based Products and Services.
In this course, students will study innovation and new product development in the context of Webbased products and services. This course lies at the intersection of product design and information
technology; it is intended for students with general interests in the design of new products and/or
information technology management. The course builds from a general product design methodology.
For example, students begin with opportunity identification and analysis of user needs. However, the
course also extends principles and practices used in innovation and new product development to
information technologies in general and the Web in particular. For example, design-for-manufacturing
is addressed with open-source software and Web services. Robust Engineering and Design of
Experiments is applied to paper prototyping and server log analysis. The course is an interdisciplinary,
integrative project-based course. Through weekly assignments, students apply the tools and
techniques to the design of a new product, culminating in the initial roll-out of a working service. The
course is open to juniors and seniors in SEAS or Wharton

Page 6 of 17

OPERATIONS,INFORMATION AND DECISIONS
(WH) {OIDD}
469. Information Strategy and Economics. (C)
The course is devoted to the study of the strategic use of information and the related role of
information technology. The topics of the course vary year to year, but generally include current issues
in selling digital products, intermediation, and disintermediation, designing and competing in electronic
markets, outsourcing, and technology project management. Heavy emphasis is placed on utilizing
information economics to analyze new and existing businesses in information-intensive industries.
Technology skills are not required, although a background in information technology management
(equivalent to OPIM210), strategic management or managerial economics is helpful.
611. Quality and Productivity. (A)
Matching supply with demand is an enormous challenge for firms: excess supply is too costly,
inadequate supply irritates customers. In the course, we will explore how firms can better organize
their operations so that they more effectively align their supply with the demand for their products and
services. Throughout the course, we illustrate mathematical analysis applied to real operational
challenges--we seek rigor and relevance. Our aim is to provide both tactical knowledge and high-level
insights needed by general managers and management consultants. We will demonstrate that
companies can use (and have used) the principles from this course to significantly enhance their
competitiveness.
612. Business Analytics. (B)
"Managing the Productive Core: Business Analytics" is a course on business analytics tools and their
application to management problems. Its main topics are optimization, decision making under
uncertainty, and simulation. The emphasis is on business analytics tools that are widely used in
diverse industries and functional areas, including operations, finance, accounting, and marketing.
621. Decision Models and Uncertainty. (A) Lecture and discussion, with case studies and problem
assignments.
The applicability and use of management science models have increased dramatically in recent years
due to the extraordinary improvements in computer, information, and communication technologies.
Personal computers and friendly interfaces have become effective "delivery vehicles" for powerful
decision models that were once the exclusive province of experts. This core course in management
sicnece has a twofold purpose. First, it seeks to introduce simple models and ideas that provide
powerful (and oftentimes surprising) qualitative insights about a large spectrum of managerial
problems. Its main topics include linear and integer programming, decision making under uncertainty,
and simulation. Second, it aims to give a feeling for the kinds of problems that can be tackled
quantitatively, the methods and software available for doing so and the difficulties involved in gathering
the relevant data. the emphasis is on models that are widely used in diverse industries and functions
areas, including finance, operations, accounting, and marketing.
613. Managing the Productive Core of the Firm: Information and Business Transformation. (B)
Information technology has transformed many industries, including media, financial services, and
retailing, among others. These technologies ahve changed not only how we produce services (e.g.,
outsourcing and offshoring, and their newest extension, cloud computing) but what services we offer
(virtual experiences, online advertising, long tail products and services, and social networking). The
purpose of this course is to improve understanding of how information technologies enable
transformation of business models within existing organizations as well as the development of
completely new business models and new organizational forms. The course will serve as an
introductory course on information technologies and will serve as a foundation on which students can
explore more advanced technology concepts.

Page 7 of 17

OPERATIONS,INFORMATION AND DECISIONS
(WH) {OIDD}
614. Innovation. (A)
The course is first and foremost an intensive, integrative, project course in which student teams create
one or more real businesses. Some businesses spun out of the course and now managed by alumni
include Terrapass Inc. and Smatchy Inc. The project experience is and exciting context in which to
learn key tools and fundamentals useful in innovation, problem solving, and design. Examples of these
tools and fundamentals are: problem definition, identification of opportunities, generating alternatives,
selecting among alternatives, principles of data graphics, and managing innovation pipelines. The
course requires a commitment of at least 10 hours of work outside of class and comfort working on
unstructured, interdisciplinary problems. Students with a strong interest in innovation and
entrepreneurship are particularly encouraged to enroll. Please read carefully the syllabus posted online before registering for this course.
615. Operations Strategy. (B)
Operations strategy is about organizing people and resources to gain a competitive advantage in the
delivery of products (both goods and services) to customers. This course approaches this challenge
primarily from two perspectives: 1) how should a firm design their products so that they can be
profitably offered; 2) how can a firm best organize and acquire resources to deliver its portfolio of
products to customers. To be able to make intelligent decisions regarding these high-level choices, this
course also provides a foundation of analytical methods. These methods give students a conceptual
framekwork for understanding the linkage between how a firm manages its supply and how well that
supply matches the firm's resulting demand. Specific course topics include designing service systems,
managing inventory and product variety, capacity planning, approaches to sourcing and supplier
management, constructing global supply chains, managing sustainability initiatives, and revenue
management. This course emphasizes both quantitative tools and qualitative frameworks. Neither is
more important than the other.
632. (LAW 517) Operations Management: Supply Chain Management. (B) Lectures, cases, class
discussions.
Matching supply with demand is a primary challenge for a firm: excess supply is too costly, inadequate
supply irritates customers. Matching supply to demand is easiest when a firm has a flexible supply
process, but flexibility is generally expensive. In this course we wll 1) learn how to assess the
apprppriate level of supply flexibility for a given industry and 2) explore stategies for economically
increasing a firm's supply flexibility. While tactical models and decisions are part of this course, the
emphasis is on the qualitative insights needed by general managers or management consultants. We
will demonstrate that companies can use (and have used) the principles from this course to
significantly enhance their competitiveness.
Inactive
640. (LGST640) Digital Game Design Techniques for Business: Rules, Incentives, Applications.
(C) Werbach, Hunter.Prerequisite(s): none.
Why can't work be fun? Leading firms are engaging in the practice of gamification, using the
techniques of digital game designers to serve objectives as varied as marketing, human resources
management, productivity enhancement, training, innovation, and customer engagement. This course
will examine the mechanism of gamification and provide an understanding of their effective use in the
modern firm. Cross-listed with LGST 640.
The course will draw upon interdisciplinary source material as well as real-world case studies and
production game environments to identify effective analytical models, strategies, techniques, and
metrics for the application of games to business. It will also identify a number of significant pitfalls to
the successful implementation of gamification techniques, notably legal and ethical issues, the
difficulty of making things fun, and the problems with implementaing radical change in established
firms. The course will include both in-person meetings and web-based online sessions.

Page 8 of 17

OPERATIONS,INFORMATION AND DECISIONS
(WH) {OIDD}
654. Product Design and Development. (B) Staff. Lectures, case and problem analyses, group
presentations, the development of a new product to the prototype stage.
The course provides the student with a number of tools and concepts necessary for creating and
managing product development processes.The course consists of two interwoven parts. First, it
presents the basic steps that are necessary for moving from a "cool idea" to a product sufficiently
mature to launch an entrepreneurial start-up. This includes cases, lectures, and exercises on topics
like identifying customer needs, developing a product concept as well as effective prototyping
strategies. The capstone of this first part is a real project in which student teams conceptualize and
develop a new product or service up to the completion of a fully functional prototype.
Second, the course discusses a number of challenges related to product development as
encountered by management consultants, members of cross-functional development teams as well as
general managers. We will analyze several cases related to, among others, resource allocation in R&D
organizations, organizational forms of product development teams, as well as managing development
projects across large geographic distances.
652. Advanced Management Science: Models and Applications. (M) Prerequisite(s): OPIM 621.
This course will cover applications of decision models to managerial problems in a variety of business
functions. The course will use management science techniques such as mathematical programming
(LP/IP/NLP), Monte-Carlo simulation, decision trees, probability theory and statistical analysis as the
vehicle for applying diverse management theories to real-world problems. Potential in-class
applications include product-line selection, risk management, corporate real options, and supply-chain
restructuring. The course will emphasize the practical application of these techniques; problems will be
solved using popular packages such as Excel, and Crystal Ball.
653. (OIDD353) Mathematical Modeling and its Application in Finance. (C) Tsoukalas.Prerequisite
(s): Either OPIM321 or OPIM612 (or a similar optimization class).
Quantitative methods have become fundamental tools in the analysis and planning of financial
operations. There are many reasons for this development: the emergence of a whole range of new
complex financial instruments, innovations in securitization, the increased globalization of the financial
markets, the proliferation of information technology and the rise of high-frequency traders, etc. In this
course, models for hedging, asset allocation, and multi-period portfolio planning are developed,
implemented, and tested. In addition, pricing models for options, bonds, mortgage-backed securities,
and other derivatives are studied. The models typically require the tools of statistics, optimization, and/
or simulation, and they are implemented in spreadsheets or a high-level modeling environment,
MATLAB. This course is quantitative and will require extensive computer use. The course is intended
for students who have strong interest in finance. The objective is to provide students the necessary
practical tools they will require should they choose to join the financial services industry, particularly in
roles such as: derivatives, quantitative trading, portfolio management, structuring, financial
engineering, risk management, etc. Prospective students should be comfortable with quantitative
methods
quantitative methods, such as basic statistics and the methodologies (mathematical programming
and simulation) taught in OPIM612 Business Analytics or OPIM321 Management Science (or
equivalent). Students should seek permission from the instructor if the background requirements are
not met.
655. (MKTG655) Operations, Marketing, and Design Integration. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): MKTG
621, MKTG 622, OPIM 631, OPIM 632. Crosslisted with MKTG 655
This course covers topics that span marketing and operations management. Students will examine
issues and decisions that require significant coordination between managers in marketing and
operations. Topics include channel management, supply chain design, product variety management
and service operations pricing and control.

Page 9 of 17

OPERATIONS,INFORMATION AND DECISIONS
(WH) {OIDD}
656. (ESE 522) Operations Strategy. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): OPIM 621, OPIM 631, and OPIM 632
or equivalent. Crosslisted with ESE 522
This course examines how organizations can develop and leverage excellence in process
management. The first module focuses on operations strategy. In these classes, we examine what
constitues an operation strategy and how organizations can create value by managing complexity,
incertainty, and product development. In the second half of the course, we discuss recent
developments in both manufacturing and service industries. Specifically, we examine initiatives in
quality, lean manufacturing and enterprise-wide planning systems. The course is recommended for
those interested in consulting or operations careers, as well as students with an engineering
backround who wish to develop a better understandingof managing production processes.
664. Database and Information Management Systems. (C) Staff.
Data and information are critical to the modern organization. Whether used in knowledge
management, business intelligence, enterprise resource planning (ERP), product design, marketing,
personalization and other aspects of managing customer relationships (CRM), the underlying
principles of data management are the same. This course aims to provide a practical introduction to
the fundamental principles. Examples and exercises will cover the relational database tools at the core
of ERP, CRM, and on-line exchanges and portals. However, the course will also use the same basic
foundations to consider emerging technologies and standards such as XML, ebXML, UDDI, etc.
Inactive
658. Service Operations Management. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Courses in operations
management, linear programming, probability and statistics.
The service sector represents the largest segment of most industrial economies. In the U.S., for
example, it accounts for approximately 70% of GDP and 70% of employment. In addition to this "pure"
service sector, the operations and competitive positions of many manufacturing firms are becoming
increasingly service-oriented. While operational excellence is critical for success in most industries
today, in a wide range of service industries this is particularly true. For example, recent, significant
deregulation in banking, health care, and communications has led to intensified competition and
pressure on operations. At the same time, the rapid evolution of information technology has enabled
firms to operate in a fashion - and offer a level of service - that has not been previously possible.
Elements common to most services make the management of their operations complex, however. In
particular, services are intangible, not storable or transportable, and often highly variable. Frequently
their delivery involves distributed operations with a significant amount of customer contact. All of these
factors make service opertions end up looking quite a bit different than manufacturing operations, and
the task of achieving excellence in them requires specialized analysis frameworks and tools.
This course covers a mix of qalitative and quantitative models that provide the necessary tools. The
class will focus on simple models that should help you to better understand both the difficulty of
managing and the underlying economics of the service operations being considered. You will have the
opportunity to apply these course tools in a group service assessment field project.
659. Advanced Topics in Quantitative Methods and Operations Management. (C)
Staff.Prerequisite(s): OPIM 631 and OPIM 632.
The specific content of this course varies from semester to semester, depending on student and
faculty interest. Recent topics have included global operations, product design and development,
quality management, and logistics strategy. See department for course description.
Inactive

Page 10 of 17

OPERATIONS,INFORMATION AND DECISIONS
(WH) {OIDD}
662. (OIDD314) Enabling Technologies. Lectures, discussions, assignments and class participation.
This course is about understanding emerging technology enablers with a goal of stimulating thinking
on new applications for commerce. No prerequisite or technical background is assumed. The class is
self-contained (mainly lecture-based) and will culminate in a class-driven identification of novel
businesses that exploit these enablers.
No prerequisite or technical background is assumed. Students with little prior technical background
can use the course to become more technologically informed. Those with moderate to advanced
technical background may find the course a useful survey of emerging technologies. The course is
recommended for students interested in careers in consulting, investement banking and venture
capital in the tech sector.
665. Operations Management in Health Care. Faculty.Prerequisite(s): OPIM 631.
In an era where health care systems around the world face rapidly rising costs and quality issues,
organizations large and small are looking into the operational side of health care for solutions.
Likewise, the abundance of unfulfilled needs in the health care marketplace has led to an array of
technology ventures with innovative new products and services. In this course, we apply the tools of
operations management to analyze the health care value chain. The course consists of four modules:
(1) the management of productivity, quality, and variability by care providers, (2) capacity and
investment decisions under uncertainty confronting pharmaceuticals, (3) the design of health
insurance by health plans and the determination of health benefits by employers, and (4) business
ideas and operations models from the intersection of academic research and technology ventures.
Students will learn from case discussions, hands-on decision tools, and several distinguished
speakers and alumni from Stanford Hospital & Clinics, Merck, U.S. Naval Academy, and Deloitte
Consulting. No prior exposure to the health care industry is assumed. The course prepares students
for several career paths including consulting, operations management, and health care administration
and is open to both first- and second-year MBA students.
669. Advanced Topics in Information Strategy. (B) Staff.
The capstone course for the MBA major "Information Strategy, Systems, & Economics," OPIM 669
covers essential topics in information strategy - such as pricing of information goods; competing in
electronic markets; market transparency and search issues; information-intensive strategies; IT
outsourcing; and software project management - that have high impact on 21st-century business but
are not typically covered in other Wharton courses.
Inactive
672. (OIDD410) Decision Support Systems. (C) Staff. Lectures and discussions, written
assignments, projects using software packagesto build models.
The past few years have seen an explosion in the amount of data collected by businesses and have
witnessed enabling technologies such as database systems, client-server computing and artificial
intelligence reach industrial strength. These trends have spawned a new breed of systems that can
support the extraction of useful information from large quantities of data. Understanding the power and
limitations of these emerging technologies can provide managers and information systems
professionals new approaches to support the task of solving hard business problems. This course will
provide an overview of these techniques (such as genetic algorithms, neural networks, and decision
trees) and discuss applications such as fraud detection, customer segmentation, trading, marketing
strategies and customer support via cases and real datasets.

Page 11 of 17

OPERATIONS,INFORMATION AND DECISIONS
(WH) {OIDD}
670. Special topics in Information Systems: Simulation and Dynamic Competitive Strategy. (M)
This course introduces tools and techniques for modeling dynamic competitive strategies - strategies
that evolve over time as you and competitors take actions in response to each other and to changes in
the competitive environment. This goes beyond case discussions and approximates the rigor of
theoretical or game theoretical analyses, even for problems for which no traditional analytical solutions
exist. Students of the course will learn to model business environments and design simulators with the
goal of gaining insight and designing policies for strategy implementation. Students will develop
understanding of the timing and sequencing of the actions required, as well as understanding how to
modify strategies on the fly based on changing conditions or objectives. Students are introduced to
state of the art software for general purpose business modeling and simulation.
Inactive
673. Global Supply Chain Mgmt..
Several forces, ranging from technology that has dramatically reduced the cost of communication, to
political developments such as the opening up of China, Vietnam, and Eastern Europe, have created
an avalanche of outsourcing and offshoring and lead to supply chains that stretch halfway around the
world. This course will study the many questions that arise in the management of such global supply
chains, including: Which design and production activities to do in-house and which to outsource?
Where to locate various activities around the world? How to forecast the many factors that influence
these decisions, including inflation in cost factors such as labor and freight, and the likelihood of future
government regulation or political instability? How to keep the supply chain flexible so as to adapt to
change? How to manage a geographically disbursed supply chain, including what relationships to
have with vendors to ensure low cost, high quality, flexibility, safety, humane labor practices and
respect for sustainability of the environment? The course is highly interactive, using case discussions
in most classes and senior supply chain executives in many sessions. Grades are based one-third
each on class participation, indivudla write-ups of the discussion questions for 3 of the class sessions,
and a course paper.
676. Electronic Markets: Structures, Market Mechanisms and IT Enabled Strategies. Prerequisite
(s): MGEC 621 is recommended.
This course deals with Electronic Markets and Market structures and the strategic uses of information
within the firm. The course consists of four related modules on the design and functioning of Business
to Business markets, use of technology to source services from global providers - i.e., outsourcing of
business processes (as opposed to IT), the use of strategic technological platforms such as CRM and
Web Services and the technology-enabled precision pricing techniques. Further, students are exposed
to strategy formulation and execution in an online market where they compete both against each other
and against (electronic) agents. This course is recommended for students interested in a career in
consulting, strategic management and to students interested in information technology related
professions. The course will be delivered through a mix of lectures, case discussions and hands-on
trading in virtual markets using different market mechanisms. The course Web cafe will be used for
discussions and responses from instructor and TA. We do not assume or require any specific technical
knowledge.
Workings of electronic markets and market mechanisms and how IT can enable the formulation of
new strategies and empower firms to define new markets in ways that were not possible until recently.
This is an advanced elective that covers several essential topics in information strategy - IT and
market structure, impact of IT on knowledge-intensive products and services and creating hybrid
markets that span multiple channels. Students will compete in simulated electronic markets, using
different market mechanisms and formulate information-based strategies. Students will also study how
IT has enabled the globalization of services through the outsourcing of processes (BPO) and how
quasi market structures which combine elements of organization and markets are emerging in
knowledge-intensive service industries.

Page 12 of 17

OPERATIONS,INFORMATION AND DECISIONS
(WH) {OIDD}
690. (MGMT690) Managerial Decision Making. (C) Staff. Crosslisted with MGMT 690.
The course is built around lectures reviewing multiple empirical studies, class discussion,and a few
cases. Depending on the instructor, grading is determined by some combination of short written
assignments, tests, class participation and a final project (see each instructor's syllabus for details).
698. (OIDD398) Value Netwoks. (M) Staff.
This is a project-based course run in a seminar format to explore current trends and opportunities for
integration and coordination in IT-enabled value-chain networks. The curriculum is structured around a
live case; students will work in teams to synthesize data from the live case and evaluate possible
operational strategies and IT enablers in the context of a real, on-going business restructuring
decision. Students will review a set of operations strategies affecting production, fulfillment,
procurement product design, and support that may prove relevant e.g. Postponement, Mass
Customization, Customer Service Differentiation, Buyer/Supplier Coordination. We also consider
functionality that underlies relevant information technologies like Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)
or Customer Relationship Management (CRM), e.g. data integration, information quality, and security.
Finally, we invite different vendors into the class to provide students with the opportunity to compare
and contrast state-of-the-art IT and Operations Management solutions.
Inactive
691. (LGST806, MGMT691, OIDD291) Negotiations. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): STAT 621,OPIM 621.
Crosslisted with LGST 806, MGMT 691. Lectures, cases, presentations, and written assignments.
Negotiation is the art and science of creating good agreements. In this course we will work on both,
studying economics and psychology for the science, and practicing actual negotiations for the art.
Throughout we think of negotiation in general terms, relevant not only to salary negotiations and home
buying, but performance evaluations, speeches, group collaborations and interpersonal relationships.
We practice these kinds of negotiations in 2-, 3-, 4-, and 6-person exercises. Potential reasons to skip
this particular negotiation course: 1) We have a strong attendance policy, 2) We have strong nocomputers/phones policies, 3) the course is very discussion oriented, 4) We survey your work
colleagues about your influence tactics, and 5) you have a short assignment due almost every class.
Beginning with the second week of class, if you miss one class you lose a letter grade. If you miss two
classes you fail. We have this policy because it is an experiential class, and because your attendance
directly affects classmates you are paired with. For some weeks you can attend another section if
necessary. Cross-listed with MGMT691 and LGST806.
693. (LGST693) INFLUENCE. (C)
697. (OIDD397) Retail Supply Chain Management. (C) Lectures, case discussion, guest speakers.
Class participation, papers, and a team report.
This course is highly recommended for students with an interest in pursuing careers in: (1) retailing
and retail supply chains; (2) businesses like banking, consulting, information technology, that provides
services to retail firms; (3) manufacturing companies (e.g. P&G) that sell their products through retail
firms. Retailing is a huge industry that has consistently been an incubator for new business concepts.
This course will examine how retailers understand their customers' preferences and respond with
appropriate products through effective supply chain management. Supply chain management is vitally
important for retailers and has been noted as the source of success for many retailers such as Walmart and Home Depot, and as an inhibitor of success for e-tailers as they struggle with delivery
reliability. See M. L. Fisher, A. Raman and A. McClelland, "Rocket Science Retailing is Coming - Are
You Ready?," Harvard Business Review, July/August 2000 for related research.

Page 13 of 17

OPERATIONS,INFORMATION AND DECISIONS
(WH) {OIDD}
761. (BEPP261, BEPP761, BEPP961, OIDD261) Risk Analysis and Environmental Management.
(C) Staff. Cross listed with OPIM 261, BPUB 261, 761, 961, and ESE 567
This course is designed to introduce students to the role of risk assessment, risk perception and risk
management in dealing with uncertain health, safety and environmental risks including the threat of
terrorism. It explores the role of decision analysis as well as the use of scenarios for dealing with these
problems. The course will evaluate the role of policy tools such as risk communication, economic
incentives, insurance, regulation and private-public partnerships in developing strategies for managing
these risks. A project will enable students to apply the concepts discussed in the course to a concrete
problem. Cross-listed with BPUB 761.
762. Environmental Sustainability and Value Creation. (C) Staff. MBA mini elective.This course is
one of the set of mini-elective courses satisfying the core requirement. Lecture and discussion
including guest speakers. Class discussion, presentations, and final project.
This course approaches environmental issues, and sustainable development more largely, from the
standpoint of business. It emphasizes the trends in corporate practices and uses case studies to
examine the interactions between the environment and the firm. Value creation focuses on new
innovative services and financial products in this fast growing sphere. This course has three objectives:
to increase your knowledge as future top decision makers on key environmental questions; to
recognize environmental concerns as competitive opportunities; to teach students to think strategically
and act entrepreneurially on environmental issues. You will leave the class with a tool-kit for action.
763. (BEPP763) ENERGY MARKETS & POLICY.
898. Advanced Topics. (M)
900. (PSYC608) Foundations of Decision Processes. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): STAT 510 or 550.
The course is an introduction to research on normative, descriptive and prescriptive models of
judgement and choice under uncertainty. We will be studying the underlying theory of decision
processes as well as applications in individual group and organizational choice. Guest speakers will
relate the concepts of decision processes and behavioral economics to applied problems in their area
of expertise. As part of the course there will be a theoretical or empirical term paper on the application
of decision processes to each student's particular area of interest.
913. Advanced Linear Programming. (M) Prerequisite(s): OPIM 910/ESE504 or equivalent.
In-depth study of the theory and algorithms related to the solution of linear programming problems.
Optimality conditions, duality and sensitivity analysis. Primal and dual simplex methods. Interior point
methods. Large-scale optimization. Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition.
904. (BEPP904) Experimental Economics. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): OPIM900 or permission of the
instructor.
Many theories in economics can be tested usefully in experiments in which researchers control
parameters that are uncontrolled in natural settings. This course presents the theory of the
experimental method and validity along with several examples of experimental testing: simple
competitive equilibrium, intertemporal competitive equilibrium, asset markets, futures markets,
bargaining models, tournaments, reputation-building in repeated games, etc.
SM 906. Proseminar in Operations and Information Management. (M) Staff.

Page 14 of 17

OPERATIONS,INFORMATION AND DECISIONS
(WH) {OIDD}
910. (ESE 504) Concepts of Math Programming. (A) Staff. Crosslisted w/ ESE 504.
Introduction to mathematical programming for PhD students who would like to be intelligent and
sophisticated consumers of mathematical programming theory but do not plan to specialize in this
area. Integer and nonlinear programming are covered, including the fundamentals of each area
together with a sense of the state-of-the-art and expected directions of future progress.
914. Advanced Non-Linear Programming. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): OPIM910 or equivalent.
Convex sets and functions. Tangent cones. Polar cones. Optimality conditions and duality theory.
Methods for unconstrained and constrained optimization. Interior and exterior penalty methods.
Lagrangean and augmented Lagrangean methods.
915. Advanced Graph Theory. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): OPIM910 / ESE504 or equivalent.
Deals mainly with algorithmic and computational aspects of graph theory. Topics and problems include
reachability and connectivity, setcovering, graph coloring, location of centers, location of medians,
trees, shortest path, circuits, traveling salesman problem, network flows, matching, transportation, and
assignment problems.
916. Advanced Integer Programming. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): OPIM 910 or equivalent.
In-depth review of solution methods: Lagrangean relaxation and column generation, Benders
partitioning, cross-decomposition, surrogate relaxation, cutting planes and valid inequalities, logical
processing, probing, branch-and-bound, branch-and-price. Study of special problems and applications:
matching, location, generalized assignment, traveling salesman, forest planning, production
scheduling.
920. Empirical Research in Operations Management.
Empirical research in Operations Management has been repeatedly called for over the last 10-15
years, including calls made from the academic thought leaders in the field as well as by many of the
editors of the top academic journals. Remarkably though, most researchers in the field would be
pressed to name even three empirical papers published in such journals like Management Science or
Operations Research. But, has there really been so little published related to empirical Operations
Management (you might be surprised to learn that all five bullets listed above has been addressed by
Management Science papers)? What types of problems in operations are interesting and worthwhile
studying from an empirical viewpoint? How can one get started with an empirical research project in
Operations Management? These are the questions that are at the heart of this course.
Specifically, the objective of this course is to (a) expose doctoral students to the existing empirical
literature and (b) to provide them with the training required to engage in an empirical study
themselves.
930. Stochastic Models. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): STAT510 or 550 or equivalent.
This course introduces mathematical models describing and analyzing the behavior of processes that
exhibit random components. The theory of stochastic processes will be developed based on
elementary probability theory and calculus. Topics include random walks, Poisson processes, Markov
chains in discrete and continuous time, renewal theory, and martingales. Applications from the areas
of inventory, production, finance, queueing and communication systems will be presented throughout
the course.

Page 15 of 17

OPERATIONS,INFORMATION AND DECISIONS
(WH) {OIDD}
931. (STAT901) Stochastic Processes ll. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): OPIM930. Crosslisted with STAT
901
Extension of the material presented in OPIM930 to include renewal theory, martingales, and Brownian
motion.
932. Queuing Theory. (J) Staff.Prerequisite(s): OPIM930 and OPIM931.
This course presents the mathematical foundations for the analysis of queueing systems. We will study
general results like Little's law and the PASTA property. We will analyze standard queueing systems
(Markovian systems and variations thereof) and simple queueing networks, investigate infinite server
models and many server approximations, study GI/G/1 queues through random walk approximations,
and read papers on applied queueing models.
934. Dynamic Programming and Stochastic Models. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): OPIM930.
The course goal is to provide a brief but fairly rigorous introduction to the formulation and solution of
dynamic programs. Its focus is primarily methodological. We will cover discrete state space problems,
over finite or infinite time horizon, with and without discounting. Structured policies and their theoretical
foundation will be of particular interest. Computational methods and approximation methods will be
addressed. Applications are presented throughout the course, such as inventory policies, production
control, financial decisions, and scheduling.
940. Operations Management. (C) Staff. Crosslisted with ESE 620
Concepts, models, and theories relevant to the management of the processes required to provide
goods or services to consumers in both the public and private sectors. Includes production, inventory
and distribution functions, scheduling of service or manufacturing activities, facility capacity planning
and design, location analysis, product design and choice of technology. The methodological basis for
the course includes management science, economic theory,organization theory, and management
information system theory.
941. Distribution Systems Seminar. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): OPIM940.
Seminar on distribution systems models and theory. Reviews current research in the development and
solution of models of distribution systems. Emphasizes multi-echelon inventory control, logistics
management, network design, and competitive models.
943. Retail Operations..
950. Perspectives on Information Systems. (C) Staff.
Provides doctoral students in Operations and Information Management and other related fields with a
perspective on modern information system methodologies, technologies, and practices. State-of-theart research on frameworks for analysis, design, and inplementation of various types of information
systems is presented. Students successfully completing the course should have the skills necessary to
specify and implement an information system to support a decision process.

Page 16 of 17

OPERATIONS,INFORMATION AND DECISIONS
(WH) {OIDD}
SM 951. Seminar on Logic Modeling. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Permission of the instructor and
some prior knowledge of logic or Prolog.
Seminar on the elements of formal logic necessary to read and contribute to the Logic modeling
literature, as well as the implementation principles for logic models. The primary topics include
elements of sentence and predicate logic, elements of modal logics, elements of semantics,
mechanical theorem proving, logic and database, nonmonotonic reasoning, planning and the frame
problem, logic programming, and metainterpreters.
SM 952. Computational Game Theory. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Permission of instructor and
knowledge of logic and Prolog or Lisp.
Seminar on principles of knowledge-based systems including expert systems. Topics include basics of
expert systems, knowledge representation, meta-level reasoning, causal reasoning, truth maintenance
systems, model management, planning systems and other applications.
955. Research Seminar in Information Systems.
This course provides an overview of some of the key Information Systems literature from the
perspective of Insormation Strategy and Economics (ISE) and Information Decision Technologies
(IDT). This course is intended to provide an introduction for first year OPIM doctoral students, as well
as other Wharton doctoral students, to important core research topics and methods in ISE and IDT in
order for students to do research in the field of Information Systems. While it is intended as a "first
course" for OPIM doctoral students in ISE and IDT, it may also be useful for students who are engaged
in research or plan to perform information technology related research in other disciplines.
960. Research Seminar in Information Technology - Economic Perspectives. (A)
Explores economic issues related to information technology, with emphasis on research in
organizational or strategic settings. The course will follow a seminar format, with dynamically assigned
readings and strong student contribution during class sessions (both as participant and, for one class,
as moderator.)
961. Research Seminar in Information: Strategy, Systems and Economics.
This is the advanced doctoral-level research research in information strategy and economics that
builds on the foundations developed in OPIM960. Much of the content will be focused on current
research areas in information strategy such as the information and organizational economics,
information technology and firm performance, search cost and pricing, information and incentives,
coordination costs and the boundary of the firm, and the economics of information goods (including
pricing and intellectual property protection). In addition, promising empirical approaches such as the
use of intelligent agents for data collection or clickstream data analysis will be discussed.
992. Conflict Mgmt Seminar. (B)

Page 17 of 17

