PHARMACOLOGY
(MD) {PHRM}
495. (CHEM495) HIGH THROUGHPUT DISCOVER. (B)
510. (INSC596, NGG 510) Neuropharm/Neurochem. (J) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Permission of course
director. Meets two times per week.
Neurochemistry and neuropharmacology of the central nervous system. Lectures cover the structure
and properties of neurons, neurotransmitters and signal transduction. Students are expected to
already have an understanding of the material in Cooper, Bloom and Roth, THE BIOCHEMICAL
BASIS of NEUROPHARMACOLOGY or its equivalent. Course readings will be both primary and
review articles.
532. (CAMB532) Human Physiology..
534. (GCB 534) EXPERIMENTAL GENOME SCI.
SM 542. (CAMB542) Topics in Molecular Medicine. (A) Skip Brass, MD, PhD; Gary Koretzky, MD,
PhD; Mark Kahn, MD.Prerequisite(s): Permission of the course directors. The course is designed
primarily for combined degree (MD/PhD) students, but will be available to all medical and graduate
students as space permits. Prioritywill be given to 2st and 2nd year combined degree students. The
optimal class size will be 14. Tentatively, the course will meet for one hour from 4 - 5 pm on
Wednesday afternoons with occasional double sessions that will be two hours long.
TiMM is planned as a once-weekly seminar course whose goal is to introduct students to the ways in
which biomedical research can provide new insights into clinical medicine and, conversely, how
knowledge of clinical disease impacts scientific discovery.
550. (NGG 576, PSYC750) Advanced Topics in Neuropsychopharmacology. (B) Lucki and
staff.Prerequisite(s): Permission of instructor. Meets two times per week
Biological issues relevant to neuropsychiatric illnesses are covered in detail in four sections. The first
section covers clinical aspects of major psychiatric disorders and includes some contact with patients.
The second section presents the neuroanatomy of the limbic system. In the third section, emphasis is
on the mechanisms of action of psychotropic drugs, including antidepressants, antipsychotics,
anxiolytics, and stimulants. The final section covers information relevant to understanding biological
processes that may be abnormal in neuropsychiatric illnesses, such as stress, sleep, and circadian
rhythms, as well as quantitative genetics.
564. (CBE 564) DRUG DELIVERY.
In this course, students will learn about drug delivery systems with emphasis on targeted therapeutics
and translational nanomedicine. The course will be directed and taught by Miriam Wattenbarger (CBE)
and Vladimir Muzykantov (PHRM). Lectures will also be given by other faculty from the Penn School of
of Engineering and Applied Science and the School of Medicine. The four main topics for the course
are traditional drug delivery, drug delivery systems and nanocarriers, targeted and smart drug delivery
systems, and translational aspects of drug delivery systems. There will be a midterm, final, and a
group project for the course. Students will form small groups for the project and research a drug
delivery topic to propose an extension of a current research area. An oral and written proposal will be
given by each group to the class at the end of the semester. The course is open to SEAS seniors and
graduate students, SAS college pre-med, pre-BE and pre-BGS seniors, biotechnology MS students,
PGG and BGS graduate students, Wharton and Dental School students.

Page 1 of 4

PHARMACOLOGY
(MD) {PHRM}
570. Principles of Cardiovascular Biology. (B) Drs. Vladimir Muzykantov and Emer
Smyth.Prerequisite(s): Permission of course director.
Lectures to be presented by various Medical School faculty members. Topics covered include: general
principles of vascular biology and hemodynamics, endothelial cells and integral vascular functions,
signaling in the cardiovascular system, angiogenesis, hemostasis and thrombosis, platelets, platelet/
vascular interactions, vascular integrins and adhesion molecules, vascular inflammation and oxidative
stress, white blood cells, vasoactive compounds and drugs, mechanisms of atherosclerosis,
cholesterol and lipid metabolism, hypertension, novel vascular directed gene and enzyme therapies.
SM 580. Topics In Pharmacogenetics. (B) DR. A. STEVEN WHITEHEAD.Prerequisite(s): Permission
of course director.
This is a "literature-based" course (i.e. a seminar course/literature survey). It will survey the emerging
technologies and computational advances that have permitted the field of pharmacogenetics to
mature into a major biomedical discipline over the past few years. It will consider the likely impact on
disease target identification,the development of new drugs for established and "niche" markets, the
advent of "personalized medicine", including the selection of therapies that have maximum efficacy
and minimum side-effect profiles. This course will also touch on some of the ethic issues associated
with the routine genetic testing of patients to facilitate treatment choices and clinical monitoring.
590. (REG 590) Molecular Toxicology: Chemical and Biological Mechanisms. (B) Dr. Trevor M.
Penning.Prerequisite(s): Pre-requisites: Must have taken or will take Fundamentals of Pharmacology
concurrently. Undergraduate course work in biochemistry and chemistry essential. Exceptions allowed
based on past course work. Please consult with Course Director. Students: All 1st and 2nd year
GGPS, CAMB, Neuro and BSTA students with required prerequisites; residents in Environmental and
Occupational Health, and professional masters students (MPH and MTR).
Course Goals: Exposures to foreign compounds (drugs, carcinogens, and pollutants) can disrupt
normal cellular processes leading to toxicity. This course will focus on the molecular mechanisms by
which environmental exposures lead to end-organ injury and to diseases of environmental etiology
(neurodegenerative and lung diseases, reproduction disruption and cardiovascular injury). Students
will learn the difficulties in modeling response to low-dose chronic exposures, how these exposures
are influenced by metabolism and disposition, and how reactive intermediates alter the function of
biomolecules. Mechanisms responsible for cellular damage, aberrant repair, and end-organ injury will
be discussed. Students will learn about modern predictive molecular toxicology to classify toxicants,
predict individual susceptibility and response to environmental triggers, and how to develop and
validate biomarkers for diseases of environmental etiology. Students are expected to write a term
paper on risk assessment on an environmental exposure using available TOXNET information.
600. Medical Pharmacology BIOM 600. Axelsen and staff. This course focuses on the mechanism of
action of various classes of agents used in the therapy of human disease. Drug classes covered
include neuropsychiatric drugs, anesthetics, sedatives and hypnotics, cardiovascular and
hematological drugs, drugs affecting renal function, inflammation and immune modulation, anticancer
drugs, antimicrobal drugs, endocrine and metabolic drugs. The course is coprised of four 1-hour
lectures per week by faculty with special interests and ex.Prerequisite(s): Permission of the instructor.
Class meets four days a week
This course will review basic human physiology pertinent to drug action, and then focus on the
mechanisms of action of the various classes of agents used in the therapy of human disease. It
consists of lectures by an array of faculty with special interests and expertise in the topic being
presented. Drug classes covered include: Neuropsychiatric drugs, cardiovascular and hematological
drugs, anticancer drugs, antimicrobial drugs, endocrine and metabolic drugs.

Page 2 of 4

PHARMACOLOGY
(MD) {PHRM}
623. (REG 623) Fundamentals of Pharmacology. (A) Dr. David Manning and staff.Prerequisite(s):
Permission of course director. Meets three times per week
This course is designed to introduce students to basic pharmacological concepts with special
emphasis on the molecular actions of drugs. Subject matter includes use of microcomputers to
analyze pharmacological data.
624. MEDICAL PHARMACOLOGY. Axelsen and staff. This course is centered on the molecular basis
of drug action. It is comprised of four 1-hour lectures per week (as described for PHRM 600) and
supplemented with weekly problem sets and readings designed to reinforce and expand upon
materials presented in lecture. Student evaluation is based on four exams and weekly problem sets.
PHRM 624 is requred of all 2nd year PGG students. PGG students must co-enroll in PHRM 532/
CAMB 532 (Human Physiology). Prerequisites:Cell Biolo.
630. (BMB 700, CHEM700) Frontiers in Bioorganic and Medicinal Chemistry. (A) Dr. Ian Blair, Dr.
Barry Cooperman, Dr. Dewey McCafferty.Prerequisite(s): Permission of the courses directors.
This advanced course for graduate students will be based primarily on didactic lectures from three
Penn faculty. Permission for a student to participate should first be obtained from one of the
participating faculty. A solid background in chemistry and biochemistry will be required. Overviews of
current and emerging topics in bioorganic and medicinal chemistry will be presented. Students will be
given short "take home" problem sets, two formal interim examinations, and a formal final examination
during the semester. Topics that will be covered over the semester include: Mass spectrometry of DNA
and DNA-adducts, Synthetic peptides/peptide mimics/proteins, including the expansion of the genetic
code; methods of synthesis and applications, Synthetic RNAs, DNAs and nucleic acid mimics:
methods of synthesis and applications, Synthetic oligosaccharides: methods of sythesis and
applications, Combinatorial chemistry, Enzymology of translation, Antibiotic biosynthesis, Introduction
to drug metabolism, Characterization of drug metabolites, Characterization of reactive metabolites
from drugs and endogenous molecules, DNA-adducts from drugs and endogenous molecules,
Lipidomics in drug development.
SM 632. (CAMB632) Cell Cont Sig Trans Path.. (B)
640. Topics in Cancer Pharmacology. (B) Dr. Judy Meinkoth and Dr. Wenchao Song.Prerequisite(s):
permission of course directors. Class meets Wednesdays, 1:00 - 3:00; Fall semester
Reviews of current literature on topics such as cancer cell signaling, cancer genetics, hormonal
carcinogens, environmental carcinogens, chemo- and gene therapy of cancer, cancer epidemiology
and prevention. New hypotheses in cancer etiology, prevention and treatment will be discussed as
they appear in the literature. The aim of the course is to introduce the students to the latest
development in the above areas related to cancer pharmacology.
SM 650. (BMB 650, CAMB702) Topics in Cardiovascular Pharmacology.
657. (ENVS657) HAZ WASTE HEALTH EFFECTS.

Page 3 of 4

PHARMACOLOGY
(MD) {PHRM}
660. Frontiers in Cancer Pharmacology. (A) Dr. Ian A. Blair.Prerequisite(s): Permission of the course
director.
This advanced course for graduate students combines didactic lectures from Penn faculty with oral
presentations and oral assignments from the students. Students should have either completed PHRM
560, Princliples in Cancer Signaling and Therapeutics or PHRM 640, Topics in Cancer Pharmacology
or equivalent classes. The faculty will present overviews of current and emerging topics in cancer
pharmacology. Emphasis of the presentations will be on the translation of basic science discoveries
into therapeutic agents. Students will choose related topics to explore in more detail. In consultation
with Dr. Blair, students will prepare a 45-minute presentation (using Power Point slides). Each student
will give at least two presentations during the semester. The faculty teaching the course will be
available for help with the presentations. The written assignment will involve a 10-page double spaced
paper (exclusive of references) with a maximum of 25 references. The assignment will consist of a
literature review in the area of one of the presentation topics chosen by the student. Additional
information can be obtained from the Center for Cancer Pharmacology web site: http://
www.med.upenn.edu/ccp/
699. Laboratory Rotation.
799. Independent Study. (C)
899. Pre-Dissertation Lab Rotation.
999. Research in Pharmacology. (C) Prerequisite(s): Permission of staff member.
Independent or collaborative research in various fields of pharmacology arranged individually with
members of the staff.

Page 4 of 4

