PHILOSOPHY, POLITICS, AND ECONOMICS
(AS) {PPE}
Additional courses, fulfilling the distributional and level requirements of this major, are listed
under Philosophy, Political Science, and Economics.
SM 260. Political Competition. Marini.
Political competition is an important topic to study and understand because it may have
consequences for a coutry, its international relations and its performance. The aim of the course is to
introduce the students to what political competition is, how political competition and market
competition differ, to measurement issues and to use data and methodological techniques available to
investigate the importance of political competition within and across countries. During the course the
theory explained will be accompanied by examples and articles that will help to clarify the concepts,
to understand how to use available data to study political conmpetition and its effecs on e.g. economic
performance of countries.
SM 261. Research Methods in Social Sciences.
SM 460. Experiments in Behavioral Ethics. Bicchieri, Dimant.
In reality, our understanding of different mechanisms and (economic) relationships is hampered by the
lack of data. More often than not, either the observation itself is difficult or the data is not reliable. Over
the last decades, economic experiments have become a vital part of the scientific discourse,
facilitating our understanding of the world we live in (much like in Biology, Chemistry, Physics or the
like). Economic experiments allow exploring economic behavior under controlled conditions by
generating observations under different experimental designs and controlled conditions. Pioneering
this field of research, Daniel Kahneman and Vernon Smith were awarded the Nobel memorial prize in
recognition of their work on behavioral and experimental economics. In this course, we provide you
with the methodology of how to develop a research idea and a proper experimental design that allows
to explore this idea. Essentially, you will learn how to think about ideas, generate predictions, and how
to use economic experiments to test them.

Introductory Courses
L/R 008. (PHIL008) The Social Contract. (B) Society Sector. All classes. Freeman, Tan.
This is a critical survey of the history of western modern political philosophy, beginning from the Early
Modern period and concluding with the 19th or 20th Century. Our study typically begins with Hobbes
and ends with Mill or Rawls. The organizing theme of our investigation will be the idea of the Social
Contract. We will examine different contract theories as well as criticisms and proposed alternatives to
the contract idea, such as utilitarianism. Besides the above, examples of authors we will read are
Locke, Rousseau, Hume, Mill and Marx.
L/R 072. (HSOC101, PHIL072) Biomedical Ethics. (M) Society Sector. All classes. Staff.
A survey of moral problems in medicine and biomedical research. Problems discussed include:
genetic manipulation, informed consent, infanticide, abortion, euthanasia, and the allocation of
medical resources. Moral theory is presented with the aim of enabling students to think critically and
analytically about moral issues. The need for setting biomedical issues in broader humanistic
perspective is stressed.
SM 073. (PHIL073) Topics in Ethics. (M)

Page 1 of 7

PHILOSOPHY, POLITICS, AND ECONOMICS
(AS) {PPE}
L/R 140. (CIS 140, COGS001) Introduction to Cognitive Science. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): An
introductory course in Computer Science, Linguistics, Neuroscience, Philosophy or Psychology. This
is a Formal Reasoning course.
How do minds work? This course surveys a wide range of answers to this question from disciplines
ranging from philosophy to neuroscience. The course devotes special attention to the use of simple
computational and mathematical models. Topics include perception, learning, memory, decision
making, emotion and consciousness.

Intermediate Courses
030. (ECON030) Public Policy Analysis. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): ECON 001 and 002 or ECON 010.
Credit cannot be received for both ECON 030 and 231
This course provides an introduction to the economic method for analyzing public policy questions. It
develops the implications of this method for the role of government in a market economy and for the
analysis of specific public projects.
033. (ECON033) Labor Economics. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): ECON 001 and 002. Credit cannot be
received for both ECON 033 and 233.
The course begins with an extensive discussion of models of labor market demand and supply. The
rest of the course addresses a variety of related topics including the school-to-work transition, job
training, employee benefits, the role of labor, unions, discrimination, workforce diversity, poverty, and
public policy.
034. Economics of Family & Gender. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): ECON 001, 002, or 010 and ECON
103.
The course will use economic theory and econometric analysis to explore issues regarding decision
making and allocation of resources within the family. The impact of gender roles and differences on
economic outcomes will be discussed. We will study some feminist criticism of the economic tools for
understanding household allocations and gender differences. The US economy will serve as the
reference point though developing countries will also be discussed.
035. (ECON035) Industrial Organization. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): ECON 001 or ECON 010. Credit
cannot be received for both ECON 035 and 235.
Theories of various industrial organizational structures and problems are developed, including
monopoly, oligopoly, moral hazard and adverse selection. These theories are then applied to the study
of various industries, antitrust cases, and regulatory issues.
036. (ECON036) Law and Economics. (A) Staff.Prerequisite(s): ECON 001 or ECON 010. Credit
cannot be received for both ECON 036 and 234.
The relationship of economic principles to law and the use of economic analysis to study legal
problems. Topics will include: property rights and intellectual property; analysis of antitrust and
economic analysis of legal decision making.

Page 2 of 7

PHILOSOPHY, POLITICS, AND ECONOMICS
(AS) {PPE}
062. (RUSS189) Soviet & Post-Sov Econ. Vekker.
The course will cover the development and operation of the Soviet centrally planned economy--one of
the grandest social experiments of the 20th century. We will review the mechanisms of plan creation,
the push for the collectivization and further development of Soviet agriculture, the role of the Soviet
educational system and the performance of labor markets (including forced labor camps--GULags).
We will discuss the strengths and weaknesses of the Soviet system and the causes of its collapse.
Privatization, called by some "piratization," will be one of the central issues in our consideration of the
transition from central planning to a market economy in the early 1990s. Even though our main focus
will be on the Soviet economy and post-Soviet transition, we will occasionally look back in time to the
tsarist era and even further back to find evidence to help explain Soviet/Russian economic
development.
153. (PSYC253) Judgment and Decisions. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): One semester of statistics OR
microeconomics. An LPS section may be given
Thinking, judgment, and personal and societal decision making, with emphasis on fallacies and
biases.
L/R 225. (PHIL226, PHIL521, STSC128) Philosophy of Biology. (M) Natural Science & Mathematics
Sector. Class of 2010 and beyond. Domotor, Spencer, Weisberg.
This course consists of a detailed examination of evolutionary theory and its philosophical
foundations. The course begins with a consideration of Darwin's formulation of evolutionary theory
and the main influences on Darwin. We will then consider two contemporary presentations of the
theory: Richard Dawkins' and Richard Lewontin's. The remainder of the course will deal with a number
of foundational issues including adaptation, the units of selections, the evolution of altruism, and the
possibility of grounding ethics in evolutionary theory.
232. (ECON232) Political Economy. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): ECON 101; MATH 104 and MATH 114
or MATH 115. ECON 103 is recommended.
This course examines the political and economic determinants of government policies. The course
presents economic arguments for government action in the private economy. How government
decides policies via simple majority voting, representative legislatures, and executive veto and
agenda-setting politics will be studied. Applications include government spending and redistributive
policies.
L/R 244. (PHIL244) Introduction to Philosophy of Mind. (M) Domotor, Miracchi.
This course will survey several central topics in philosophy of mind, as well as investigating how
philosopy of the mind interacts with scientific study of the mind. Among the questions we'll be asking
are: What is it to have a mind? What is the relationship between the mind and the brain? Can there be
a science of the mind? What can it tell us? What can philosophy contribute to a science of the mind?
What is consciousness? What is it to think, to perceive, to act? How are perception, thought, and
action related to one another?

Page 3 of 7

PHILOSOPHY, POLITICS, AND ECONOMICS
(AS) {PPE}
270. (PSCI271) Constitutional Law: Public Power & Civil Rights to 1912. (C) Smith.
This course explores the creation and transformations of the American constitutional system's
structures and goals from the nation's founding through the period of Progressive reforms, the rise of
the Jim Crow system, and the Spanish American War. Issues include the division of powers between
state and national governments, and the branches of the federal government; economic powers of
private actors and government regulators; the authority of governments to enforce or transform racial
and gender hierarchies; and the extent of religious and expressive freedoms and rights of persons
accused of crimes. We will pay special attention to the changing role of the Supreme Court and its
decisions in interpreting and shaping American constitutionalism, and we will also read legislative and
executive constitutional arguments, party platforms, and other influential statements of American
constitutional thought.
SM 271. (PHIL271) Global Justice. (M) Tan.
This course is an introduction to some of the central problems in global justice. Samples of these
topics include: What are our duties to respond to world poverty and what is the basis of this duty? Is
global inequality in itself a matter of justice? How universal are human rights? Should human rights
defer to cultural claims at all? Is there a right to intervene in another country to protect human rights
there? Indeed can intervention to protect human rights ever be a duty? Who is responsible for the
environment? We will read some influential contemporary essays by philosophers on these topics
with the goal of using the ideas in these papers as a springboard for our own further discussion and
analysis.
SM 272. (PHIL272) Ethics and the Professions. (M) Tan.Prerequisite(s): At Least one of PHIL 002,
008, 009 or equivalent.
Since Louise Brown, the first so-called "test tube baby" was born in 1978, reproductive technologies
have generated many new ways to "make" babies. These technologies mean that a number of difficult
ethical questions are inescapable, not only for individuals who otherwise couldn't have children (due
to biological and/or social constraints) but for the larger society.
This course will consider the prenatal moral status and identity of the fetus. It explores prenatal
(and pre-implantation) genetic interventions and their possible effects on the autonomy of the child
later in life as well as the possible eugenic implications of such interventions. It examines the potential
conflict between a mother's autonomy and an infant's prenatal harm in the larger context created by
new kinds of parents and new forms of kinship. Finally, it investigates the market for sperm, eggs,
embryos and gestation and reflects on the questions of justice they imply.
275. (PSYC275) Introduction to Political Psychology. (C) Tetlock.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 001 or
COGS 001. NOTE: Students who are more interested in business-related issues may want Wharton
276x which is a modified version of this course specifically for Wharton undergraduates.
This course will explore psychological approaches to understanding political beliefs, attitudes, and
actions at the levels of both individual citizens and national leaders. It will also explore the possibility
that psychological science itself is not immune to the political debates swirling around it. Specific
topics will include: the workings of belief systems (and their power to shape what we "see"), cognitive
biases (and their power to cause miscalculations), sacred values and their role in stabilizing belief
systems and social interaction, personality and ideology (the linkages between the personal and the
political), and clashing conceptions of morality and distributive and corrective justice (striking
variations among people in what they consider to be fair). We shall also explore some topics that have
sparked controversy in the psychological research literature and that tend to polarize opinion along
political lines, including work on intelligence and unconscious bias.

Page 4 of 7

PHILOSOPHY, POLITICS, AND ECONOMICS
(AS) {PPE}
L/R 277. (PHIL277) Justice, Law and Morality. (M) Freeman, Allen.
The course will focus on the philosophical background to the individual rights protected by the U.S.
Constitution, including 1st Amendment freedoms of religion, expression, and associaton; the 14th
amendment guarantee of Due Process and the rights of privacy, abortion, assisted suicide, and
marriage; the Equal Protection clause and equal political rights and the legitimacy of affirmative
action; and the Takings and Contract clauses and their bearing on rights of private property and
economic freedoms. In addition to Supreme Court decisions on these issues, we will read works by
political philosophers and constitutional theorists, including J.S. Mill, Ronald Dworkin, Cass Sunstein,
Martha Nussbaum, Katherine MacKinnon and others.

Advanced Courses
201. (ECON013) Strategic Reasoning. (A) Dillenberger.Prerequisite(s): Some high school algebra,
ECON 001. This course may NOT be taken concurrently or after Econ 212.
This course is about strategically interdependent decisions. In such situations, the outcome of your
actions depends also on the actions of others. When making your choice, you have to think what the
others will choose, who in turn are thinking what you will be choosing, and so on. Game Theory offers
several concepts and insights for understanding such situations, and for making better strategic
choices. This course will introduce and develop some basic ideas from game theory, using
illustrations, applications, and cases drawn from business, economics, politics, sports, and even
fiction and movies. Some interactive games will be played in class. There will be little formal theory,
and the only pre-requisites are some high-school algebra and having taken Econ 1. However, general
numeracy (facility interpreting and doing numerical graphs, tables, and arithmetic calculations) is very
important. This course will also be accepted by the Economics department as an Econ course, to be
counted toward the minor in Economics (or as an Econ elective).
202. (PSCI236) The Public Policy Process. (A) Levendusky, Hopkins.
This course integrates economic, ethical and political perspectives. It examines competing theories,
models, and analytical frameworks for understanding policymaking. The course will focus on: 1. How
public problems are framed and described; 2. What crieteria are useful in developing and assessing
policy choices; and 3. How policy choices and outcomes are mediated and influenced by individuals,
organizations and political institutions.
203. (PSYC265) Behavioral Economics and Psychology. (C) Bhatia.Prerequisite(s): ECON 001.
Prerequisite: ECON 1
This course will introduce you to the study of choice, and will examine in detail what we know about
how people make choices, and how we can influence these choices. It will utilize insights from
psychology and economics, and will apply these insights to domains including consumer choice, risky
decision making, and prosocial decision making.

Page 5 of 7

PHILOSOPHY, POLITICS, AND ECONOMICS
(AS) {PPE}
L/R 204. (PHIL228) Philosophy of Social Science. (B) Bicchieri, Weisberg.Prerequisite(s): ECON
001, ECON 002, PHIL 008 and PPE 201.
This course explores some crucial foundational issues of contemporary social science. It focuses on
vaious types of explanation, the construction of social models, and their validation. Specific topics will
include: 1. Rational choice models (including game-theoretic ones) and alternative models of bounded
rationality; 2. Experimental models in economics and psychology and whether they present a radical
departure from traditional exonomic models; 3. Evolutionary models of the emergence of institutions,
and agent-based simulations of such dynamics. In partidular, we will explore theoretical and empirical
models of trust, reciprocity, cooperation and fairness, asking what motivates individuals to engage in
pro-social behavior and how such behavior can emerge and persist. This course will cover some of
the material presented in other Core courses, with particular attention to foundational and explanatory
issues that are not usually discussed in a typical social science course.
299. Independent Study. (C) Staff.
Student arranges with a faculty member in Philosophy, Economics or Political Science to pursue a
program of reading and writing on a suitable topic.
301. Directed Honors Research. (C) Staff. Open only to senior majors in PPE.
Student arranges with a faculty member in Philosophy, Economics or Political Science to do an
honors thesis on a suitable topic.
SM 417. (PHIL417) Game Theory. (M) Bicchieri.
The course will introduce students to non-cooperative game theory and experimental games. The first
part of the course will focus on the basic elements of non-cooperative game theory. The second part
will cover the experimental literature on social dilemmas, trust and ultimatum games. The format will
consist of lectures, student presentations, and discussions.
L/R 421. (PHIL226, PHIL421) Philosophy of Biology. (M) Domotor, Spencer, Weisberg.Prerequisite
(s): Either two philosophy courses or BIOL 101/102 (or equivalent).
This course consists of a detailed examination of evolutionary theory and its philosophical
foundations. The course begins with a consideration of Darwin's formulation of evolutionary theory
and the main influences on Darwin. We will then consider two contemporary presentations of the
theory: Richard Dawkins' and Richard Lewontin's. The remainder of the course will deal with a number
of foundational issues including adaptation, the units of selections, the evolution of altruism, and the
possibility of grounding ethics in evolutionary theory.
SM 475. (HIST455, PHIL359, PHIL475, PSYC453, PSYC478) Philosophy, Politics and Economics.
(C) Staff. PPE Capstone Seminar
This is an integrative senior seminar (open to others by departmental permission).
The following website will give descriptions of the specific capstone courses that will be offered
each semester: http://www.sas.upenn.edu/ppe/CapstoneCourses/index.html
SM 476. (PSCI395, PSCI418) Philosophy, Politics and Economics. (C) Staff. PPE Capstone
Seminar
This is an integrative senior seminar (open to others by departmental permission).
The following website will give descriptions of the specific capstone courses that will be offered
each semester: http://www.sas.upenn.edu/ppe/Courses/general

Page 6 of 7

PHILOSOPHY, POLITICS, AND ECONOMICS
(AS) {PPE}
499. Advanced Research. (M) Staff.
This course may be taken by a PPE student for advanced research. Enrollment by permit only.

Page 7 of 7

