PORTUGUESE
(AS) {PRTG}

PORTUGUESE (PRTG)
Basic Language Courses
SM 110. Elementary Portuguese I. (A)
Portuguese 110 is a first-semester introductory language course for students who have not studied
Portuguese before, or who have had very little exposure to the language. The course will emphasize
the development of foundational reading, writing, listening and speaking abilitites within a cultural
context. Students will participate in paired and group activities designed to elicit meaningful and
accurate exchanges of information. The course will introduce students to Portuguese and
Lusophone culture through a variety of authentic materials, including texts, songs, films and other
audio and video material. Classes will be conducted in Portuguese.
SM 114. Portuguese for Spanish Speakers. (C)
Portuguese 114 is designed for students who have studied Spanish. The course begins with
exposure to basic vocabulary and structures, advancing at an accelerated pace. Classroon activities
will emphasize pronunciation, spoken production as well as language structures and vocabulary.
Students will participate in pairs, small-groups and whole-class activities that focus on the
meaningful and accurate exchange of information. The class will be conducted in Portuguese.
SM 120. Elementary Portuguese II. (B) Prerequisite(s): PRTG 110 or equivalent.
This class continues the development of a basic proficiency that will help reinforce the student's
abilities and confidence. A broad range of lively, high-interest readings such as newspaper and
magazine articles in current events on Brazilian culture will allow the student to gain a genuine
sense of current usage. A Brazilian movie is presented and discussed in groups. Daily homework
assignments involve writing exercises, short compositions and group projects.
SM 130. Intermediate Portuguese I. (A) Prerequisite(s): PRTG 120 or instructor's permission.
This is an intermediate course designed, in a four-course strand, for students who have taken at
least two semesters of Portuguese. Classroom activities will emphasize pronunciation, spoken
production as well as language structures and vocabulary with the objective to develop your skills in
Portuguese. In addition, students will explore movies, music and other media to further develop
reading, speaking and interpretive skills in Portuguese. The course will be conducted in Portuguese.
SM 140. Intermediate Portuguese II. (B) Prerequisite(s): PRTG 130 or instructor's permission.
This is a forth-semester intermediate course, in a four-course strand, designed for students who
have taken at least three semesters of Portuguese. Classroon activities will emphasize
pronunciation, spoken production, grammar and language structures, and vocabulary at the
advanced intermediate level. Students will explore movies, readings, news, music and other media
as they further develop speaking, writing, reading and interpretive skills in Portuguese. The course
will be conducted in Portuguese.

Undergraduate-Level Courses

Page 1 of 2

PORTUGUESE
(AS) {PRTG}
SM 202. Advanced Portuguese. (M) Prerequisite(s): PRTG 134, PRTG 140 or instructor's
permission.
This course is designed for students who have already taken basic and intermediate levels of
Portuguese. It complements students' knowledge of Portuguese by emphasizing the use of
advanced grammatical structures and vocabulary. Classes will focus on practicing such advanced
language structures by reading a diverse range of texts, including short stories by different authors
of the Lusophone countries, and two novels; speaking and writing about a variety of contemporary
texts; watching movies and documentaries; and listening to news, songs and other authentic audio
material. The emphasis will be on language usage and culture. This course will be conducted in
Portuguese.
SM 215. Portuguese for the Professions. (D) Prerequisite(s): Portuguese 202.
Portuguese for the Professions is designed for advanced-level students to develop their ability to
use a wide technical vocabulary. The course will cover an array of topics in the areas of Economy,
Politics, Science, Technology, Law and others as they pertain to the societies and cultures of the
Lusophone countries, with particular emphasis placed on Brazil. Through readings, movies,
discussions, essays and presentations, students will enhance their ability to write about and discuss
these topics while employing the appropriate technical vocabulary.
SM 216. Business Portuguese I. (A)
SM 217. Portuguese for the Professions II. (B) Prerequisite(s): PRTG 202.
Portuguese for the Professions II is a second-semester course designed to provide advanced-level
students with exposition to, and practice in, a wide variety of technical vocabulary, and to develop
their communicative skills on topics related to Brazil's economic, social and historical context.
Classroom activities will be based on the readings and discussions of articles, papers, the viewing
of documentaries and other visual media, covering an array of topics within the proposed themes.
The course will be conducted in Portuguese.
SM 221. (COLL223, LALS231) Perspectives in Brazilian Culture. (M) Mercia
Flannery.Prerequisite(s): Portuguese 202.
Topics vary. For current course description, please see department's webpage: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc
SM 240. (CINE232, COLL223, LALS240) Topics in Brazilian Culture. (C) Prerequisite(s):
Prerequisite is Portuguese 202.
Topics vary. For current course description, please see department's webpage: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc

Page 2 of 2

