POLITICAL SCIENCE
(AS) {PSCI}
SM 009. (WRIT076) Critical Writing Seminar in Political Science. (M) Staff.
This is a critical writing seminar. It fulfills the writing requirement for all undergraduates. As a disciplinebased writing seminar, the course introduces students to a topic within its discipline but throughout
emphasizes the development of critical thinking, analytical, and writing skills. For current listings and
descriptions, visit the Critical Writing Program's website at http://writing.upenn.edu/critical.
SM 010. (AFRC010) Freshman Seminars. (C) Staff.
Freshmen seminars are small, substantive courses taught by members of the faculty and open only to
freshmen. These seminars offer an excellent opportunity to explore areas not represented in high
school curricula and to establish relationships with faculty members around areas of mutual interest.
See www.college.upenn.edu/admissions/freshmen.php
105. The Study of Politics. (C) Society Sector. All classes. Staff.
This course introduces fundamental political questions, including the nature of political authority and
political rights, the relationship between power and values, variation in the role and quality of
government, origins of political institutions, and dynamics of international politics. Substantial
consideration is given to contributions by classical political thinkers as wellas contemporary political
scientists. Attention is also paid to how the systematic study of politics -- American politics,
comparative politics, international politics and political philosophy -- can deepen our understanding of
complex public policy questions.
110. (PSCI412) Introduction to Comparative Politics. (C) Society Sector. All classes. Staff.
This course is designed to introduce students to comparative political analysis. How can the political
behavior, circumstances, institutions, and dynamic patterns of change that people experience in very
different societies be analyzed using the same set of concepts and theories? Key themes include
nationalism, political culture, democratization, authoritarianism, and the nature of protracted conflict.
SM 113. Nationalism. (M) O'Leary.
115. Comparative Western European Politics. (C) Kennedy.
Comparative analysis of the political systems of Britain, France and West Germany, focusing on the
making and implementation of public policy.
116. Political Change in the "Third World". (C) Society Sector. All classes. Sil.
This is a comparative politics course that examines political and socio-economic change in the socalled "Third World," defined here as post-colonial developing areas in Asia, Africa and Latin America.
The course is not as concerned with keeping up with current events as with analyzing the relationships
between colonial legacies, the initial challenges of post-colonial political and socioeconomic
development, and how these interact with contemporary problems and global trends. Although chiefly
concerned with "political change" within countries, it will also devote substantial attention to economic,
socio-cultural and international factors. The course is divided into three parts. The first examines the
common and distinctive features of colonial rule in different regions as well as the varying challenges
of political and economic development in diverse post-colonial settings. The second part focuses on
elaborating on the themes developed in the first by looking more closely at the developmental
experiences of Brazil, India, Algeria, Iran, Nigeria, and South Korea (with passing references to other
countries as comparative referents). The third part focuses on trends and challenges that have
emerged over the last two decades - including market reforms, democratization, and problems related
to gender and the environment -

Page 1 of 25

POLITICAL SCIENCE
(AS) {PSCI}
130. Introduction to American Politics. (C) Society Sector. All classes. Staff.
This course is intended to introduce students to the national institutions and political processes of
American government. What are the historical and philosophical foundations of the American
Republic? How does American public policy get made, who makes it, and who benefits? Is a
constitutional fabric woven in 1787 good enough for today? How, if at all, should American government
be changed, and why? What is politics and why bother to study it? If these sorts of questions interest
you, then this course will be a congenial home. It is designed to explore such questions while teaching
students the basics of American politics and government.
131. American Foreign Policy. (C) Horowitz, Vitalis.
This course analyzes the formation and conduct of foreign policy in the United State. The course
combines three elements: a study of the history of American foreign relations; an analysis of the
causes of American foreign policy such sa the international system, public opinion, and the media; and
a discussion of the major policy issues in contemporary U.S. foreign policy, including terrorism, civil
wars, and economic policy.
133. (PPE 202) Introduction to African American Politics. (A) Staff.
This course is designed to provide an introduction to contemporary African American politics. We will
examine how the underlying theory and structure of American political institutions affect African
Americans' efforts to organize for effective political action. We will also analyze some of the political
behaviors and strategies utilized by African Americans as they seek to impact the political system.
134. United States Political Parties. (B) Staff.
This course is an analysis of parties in the United States, with special attention to democratic theory,
the electoral process, electronic media, as well as political organizations and their influence on
government decisions.
135. (GAFL135, HSOC135) The Politics of Food and Agriculture. (M) Summers.
Students will use course readings and their community service to analyze the institutions, ideas,
interests, social movements, and leadership that shape the "politics of food" in different arenas.
Service opportunities include work with the Urban Nutrition Initiative, Community School Student
Partnerships, and the possibility of other placements as approved by the professors.
136. (AFRC136, URBS136) Urban Politics in the United States. (B) Society Sector. All classes.
Reed.
This course explores the political character of contemporary urban American life. Particular attention is
given to the relationship between urban politics and policymaking -- including the structural and
ideological factors (e.g., dynamics of political economy, race, ethnicity, pluralism and gender) that
constrain the policy context and shape the urban environment as a terrain for commingling,
competition and conflict over uses of space. It makes considerable use of case studies to throw into
relief the complex and sometimes subtle processes that shape urban life.
SM 138. (GAFL138) Policymaking in the US. (A) Martinez.
This course is an opportunity for students to combine the major theoretical perspectives on the policy
process with practical application to current policy issues. Students will gain the theoretical tools to
explain policy change, a comprehensive understanding of the actors that influence policymaking and
politics, an overview of the major policy issues being debated, and experience writing policy
documents.

Page 2 of 25

POLITICAL SCIENCE
(AS) {PSCI}
151. International Security. (C) Goldstein.
This lecture course introduces students to the subfield of international security or strategic studies. In
order to grasp the usefulness of the theoretical ideas presented in readings and lectures, abstract
concepts are linked with a study of the national security policies states have adopted in the decades
following World War II. Topics include current debates about nuclear proliferation, terrorism, the Iraq
war, Europe's changing international role, the rise of China, Asian "flashpoints" (Korea, the Taiwan
Strait), and US secruity policy for the 21st century - considering some of the main strategic alternatives
to the US as well as their implications for the types of forces deployed (the impact of the "revolution in
military affairs," the future of missile defense, and the economic burden to be shouldered).
SM 139. (GAFL139, HSOC139, URBS137) Politics Of Poverty & Development. (M) Humanities &
Social Science Sector. Class of 2010 & beyond. Summers.
This academically based community service seminar will explore the ideas and theories, alliances and
opposition that have shaped policy and organizing efforts addressed to the problems associated with
urban poverty in the United States. There will be a special focus on the issues of increasing inequality,
education, low wage work, health and nutrition, welfare reform and social security. Students will
evaluate contemporary policy debates and programs in the light of selected case studies, readings,
and their own experience working with community groups, institutions, and federal programs in West
Philadelphia.
144. (RUSS134) COMMUNISM. (M)
150. Introduction to International Relations. (C) Society Sector. All classes. Mansfield, Stanton.
This course is an introduction to the major theories and issues in international politics. The goals of the
course are to give students a broad familiarity with the field of international relations, and to help them
develop the analytical skills necessary to think critically about international politics. The course is
divided into four parts: 1) Concepts and Theories of International Relations; 2) War and Security; 3)
The Global Economy; and 4) Emerging Issues in International Relations.
152. International Political Economy. (M) Gray.
This course examines the politics of international economic relations. The course will analyze the
interplay between politics and economics in three broad areas: international trade, international
finance, and economic development. In each section, we will first discuss economic theories that
explain the causes and consequences of international commerce, capital flows, and economic growth.
We will then explore how political interests, institutions, and ideas alter these predictions, examining
both historical examples and current policy debates.
153. International Law & Institutions. (C) Stanton.
This lecture course examines the role that international law and institutions play in international
relations. The course begins by exploring broad theoretical questions - questions about why states
create international law and international institutions; how states design institutions; the impact that
institutional design may have on the effectiveness of international institutions; and the conditions under
which states are likely to comply with the rules set out by international institutions and the dictates of
international law. Specific topics include collective security institutions such as the League of Nations,
the United Nations, and NATO; human rights law; the laws of war; international intervention and
peacekeeping; international justice and the International Criminal Court; environmental law;
international trade law and the World Trade Organization; economic development and the World Bank;
and international finance and the role of the International Monetary Fund.

Page 3 of 25

POLITICAL SCIENCE
(AS) {PSCI}
154. Politics of Global Environment. (C) Staff.
This course explores the emerging politics of global ecological decay and restoration occurring at the
individual, local, nation-state, and international levels.
156. Terrorism. (C) Staff.
This course is designed to stimulate an interest in the philosophy and methods of terrorism; to illustrate
the varieties of conditions under which methods of terrorism are used; to outline the institutional
conditions which permit and support the use of terrorism; and to understand the problems involved in
"solving" the terrorism dilemma.
180. (CLST185) Ancient Political Thought. (M) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Kennedy,
Norton.
Through reading texts of Plato (Socrates), Aristotle, Augustine and Aquinas, the student encounters a
range of political ideas deeply challenging to--and possibly corrosive of--today's dominant democratic
liberalism. Can classical and medieval thinking offer insight into modern impasses in political morality?
Is such ancient thinking plausible, useful, or dangerous?
181. (PSCI681) Modern Political Thought. (M) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Hirschmann,
Kennedy, Norton.
This course will provide an overview of major figures and themes of modern political thought. We will
focus on themes and questions pertinent to political theory in the modern era, particularly focusing on
the relationship of the individual to community, society, and state. Although the emergence of the
individual as a central moral, political, and conceptual category arguably began in earlier eras, it is in
the seventeenth century that it takes firm hold in defining the state, political institutions, moral thinking,
and social relations. The centrality of "the individual" has created difficulties, even paradoxes, for
community and social relations, and political theorists have struggled to reconicle those throughout the
modern era. We will consider the political forms that emerged out of those struggles, as well as the
changed and distinctly "modern" conceptualizations of political theory such as freedom, responsibilty,
justice, rights and obligations, as central categories for organizing moral and political life.
201. Politics, Society and Social Science. (A) DiIulio.
Everyday human behavior poses puzzles that political scientists, economists, sociologists, and other
social scientists have attempted to answer. Often their respective answers or "theories" differ widely;
and sometimes even their most widely agreed-upon answers seem to defy common sense or ask us to
believe in highly improbable findings. This new lecture course familiarizes students with different
approaches to understanding politics, society, and social science in relation to everyday questions,
intriguing puzzles, and improbable findings about human behavior. It focuses on contemporary
American politics and society, and draws mainly on literatures featuring work by leading U.S. social
scientists. In addition, the course explores the conceptual boundaries between the political, social, and
economic domains in which people interact with one another; the differences among and between
different much-acclaimed models for understanding human behavior; and the philosophical
underpinnings and moral implications associated with schools of thought about how best to describe,
analyze, and evaluate what people do--and why they do it!

Page 4 of 25

POLITICAL SCIENCE
(AS) {PSCI}
182. Contemporary Political Thought. (A) Green, Hirschmann.
This course is intended as a general introduction to political theory since 1900, examining prominent
theorists of politics including Max Weber, Hannah Arendt, Carl Schmitt, Isaiah Berlin, Jurgen
Habermas, John Rawls, Michel Foucault, and Jacques Derrida. Our theme for the Fall 2012 course will
be: The Disenchantment of the World? Topics include: the nature of the the political and the concern,
particular to the last century, that politics is itself under attack; the spread of liberal democracy across
the globe and a critical appraisal of the moral meaning of this regime; contemporary theories of social
justice; and an exploration of various issues pertaining to violence and the politics of security.
183. American Political Thought. (M) Humanities & Social Science Sector. Class of 2010 & beyond.
Norton.
Whether America begins with the Puritans and the Mayflower Compact, or with the Declaration of
Independence and the Revolution, it is founded in resistance to empire. In the generations between,
Americans have desired, dreaded and debated empire. This course will focus on empire and
imperialism in American political thought. We will read primary texts addressing empire: from the
departure and dissent of the Puritans, and Burke's Speech on Conciliation with the Colonies, to
twentieth and twenty-first century debates over America's role in the world. These texts will include
political pamphlets and speeches, poetry, novels, policy papers and film.
SM 198. Selected Topics in Political Science. (C) Staff.
Consult department for detailed descriptions. More than one course may be taken in a given semester.
Recent titles have included: The Analysis of Presidential Elections, Conservative Political Economy,
and Political Geography.
204. Political Participation. (A) Gillion.
The course offers a broad understanding of the political tactics citizens implement to voice their policy
preferences to government. This course introduces students to the mode, scope, and theoretical
perspectives of political engagement. Analyzing political behavior that ranges from voting behavior to
political protest, the course will address a variety of questions: Who engages in politics and why? What
are the individual factors that hinder or facilitate engagement in the political arena? How have citizens
political actions changed over time? While the course will mainly focus on the United States setting, it
does offer a comparative perspective by considering politicaengagement in non-democratic regimes.
210. (AFRC257, AFST257) Contemporary African Politics. (C) Grossman.
This class provides an introduction to contemporary African politics. The core questions that motivate
the course are (i) to what extent are political outcomes in contemporary Africa a consequence of its
history, culture and geography? (ii.) Why are state structures and institutions weaker in Africa than
elsewhere? (iii.) What accounts for Africa's relatively slow economic growth? (iv.) Why have some
African countries been plagued by high levels of political violence while others have not? (v.) What
explains the behavior of key African actors: parties or politicians?

Page 5 of 25

POLITICAL SCIENCE
(AS) {PSCI}
211. (JWST211) Politics in the Contemporary Middle East. (C) Vitalis or Lustick.
This course is an introduction to the most prominent historical, cultural, institutional, and ideological
features of Middle Eastern politics. Typical of the questions we shall address are why processes of
modernization and economic change have not produced liberal democracies, why Islamic movements
have gained enormous strength in some countries and not others, why conflicts in the region--between
Israel and the Arabs, Iran and Iraq, or inside of Lebanon--have been so bitter and protracted; why the
era of military coups was brought to an end but transitions to democracy have been difficult to achieve;
why Arab unity has been so elusive and yet so insistent a theme; and why oil wealth in the Gulf, in the
Arabian Peninsula, and in North Africa, has not produced industrialized or self-sustaining economic
growth.
215. The European Union. (M) O'Leary.
This lecture course, after introductory sessions which outline the EU's core institutions, is built on an
exposition of the works of major thinkers who have reflected on the European Union's origins,
outcomes and significance. It critically reviews their arguments, especially their relevance to major
recent crises, notably: the failure of the European Constitution, the current crisis of credibility facing the
Euro. Whether the European Union is a confederation, a federation, an empire, or a novel political
formation shall be examined. Whether its recent major widening signals an end to its institutional
deepening will be discussed. Whether the Union has "a democratic deficit" is examined, as is the claim
that in external relations it represents a novel form of soft power.
212. (EALC159, EALC559, PSCI512) Japanese Politics. (M) Amyx.
This course examines the politics and policies of contemporary Japan, applying a range of theoretical
perspectives to analyze both recent history and current events. We will survey the core political
institutions of the postwar era, examine patterns of political interaction, and investigate current debates
over policy. The 1990s have been marked by political change at many different levels in Japan and the
course will investigate the significance of these changes, as well as enduring continuities. Recent
changes have included the introduction of a new electoral system, shift from one party rule to coalition
government rule, breaking the bureaucracy, a financial crisis and prolonged economic stagnation. In
the latter part of the course, we will focus in particular on the puzzle of how Japan's political economic
structures and policies could have proven so successful for so long and yest so distastrous of late.
Throughout the course, students will be encouraged to think about Japanese politics in a comparative
context and to consider the functioning of the Japanese political system in the context of more
theoretical debates in political science.
213. (LALS213) Latin American Politics. (C) Falleti.
This course examines the dynamics of political and economic change in twentieth century Latin
America, with the goal of achieving an understanding of contemporary politics in the region. We will
analyze topics such as the incorporation of the region to the international economy and the
consolidation of oligarchic states (1880s to 1930s), corporatism, populism, and elict pacts (1930s and
1940s), social revolution, democratic breakdown, and military rule (1960s and 1970s), transitions to
democracy and human rights advocacy (1980s), makret-oriented reforms (1990s), and the turn to the
left of current governments (2000s). The course will draw primarily from the experiences of Argentina,
Brazil, Colombia, Chile and Mexico. No prior knowledge of the region is required.

Page 6 of 25

POLITICAL SCIENCE
(AS) {PSCI}
214. (EALC104, EALC504, PSCI514) Political Economy of East Asia. (M) Wang, Amyx.
This course examines the interplay between politics and economics in East Asia. A major course
objective is to reconcile the region's past success with the difficulties experienced in many of these
countries more recently. Another primary objective is to consider in what ways and to what degree the
growth experiences of the high-performing economies in East Asia shed light on the prospects for
long-term success of reforms currently underway in China and Vietnam. The first half of the course
begins by exploring the causes and consequences of the rise of industrial Asia. The second half of the
course examines the challenges to sustained growth faced by many countries in this region in recent
years. The course concludes by examining the challenges faced by China and Vietnam today in their
attempt to embrace more market-oriented economic systems.
216. Government and Politics of East Asia. (C) Staff.
The course will examine the relationship between culture, state, and economy of Japan, North Korea,
and South Korea. It will also analyze the nature and workings of political institutions (including political
parties and bureaucracy).
217. (PSCI517, RUSS217) Russian Politics. (B) Sil.
This course will present an in-depth examination of political, economic and social change in postSoviet Russia within a historical context. After a brief discussion of contemporary problems in Russia,
the first half of the course will delve into the rise of communism in 1917, the evolution of the Soviet
regime, and the tensions between ideology and practice over the seventy years of communist rule up
until 1985. The second part of the course will begin with an examination of the Gorbachev period and
the competing interpretations of how the events between 1985 and 1991 may have contributed to the
collapse of the Soviet Union. We will then proceed to make sense of the continuities and changes in
politics, economics and society in contemporary Russia. Important topics will include the
confrontations accompanying the adoption of a new constitution, the emergence of competing
ideologies and parties, the struggle over economic privatization, the question of federalism and
nationalism, social and political implicatons of economic reform, and prospects for Russia's future in
the Putin and post-Putin era.
218. Politics of Post War Western Europe. (M) Lynch.
This course examines political institutions, processes and events in postwar Western Europe. The
focus will be a comparative analysis of such topics as political parties and systems, electoral behavior,
as well as social and economic pollicy. We will also examine the way in which domestic processes and
policies interact with membership in the European Union.
220. (SAST223) Comparative South Asian Politics. (M) Frankel.
The comparative study of South Asian politics begins with many antecedent questions. What are the
reasons why a strong national political identity in the Indian subcontinent was no consolidated and
territorial boundaries defined until the advent of the British Raj? Alternatively, given major regional
diversities, why did the subcontinent not become differentiated into a large number of national states
on the model of Europe? To what extent was the movement toward a unified territorial state weakened
by colonial policies that recast social groups in terms of new pan-Indian categories based on caste
and religious identities? What factors led to the partition of the subcontinent at the time of
independence on the basis of religion, and what consequences did partition have for the strategies
adopted by each state to develop an overarching national identity and universal principles of legitimate
state power? Although the greater part of the course will address these questions by analyzing the
social and political dynamics of democracy in India, they are equally relevant for understanding the
difficulties encountered by Pakistan in defining a core identity and a stable form of government.

Page 7 of 25

POLITICAL SCIENCE
(AS) {PSCI}
219. Contemporary Chinese Politics. (C) Goldstein.
This lecture course introduces students to the politics of the Peoples Republic of China.
Complementing offerings in other departments, this course emphasizes events in the period since the
Chinese Communist Party established its regime in 1949. In addition to surveying the political history
of contemporary China, we will assess the meaning of these events by drawing upon theories about
the nature and significance of ideology and organization in communist regimes, factionalism and its
relationship to policy formulation and implementation, and general issues of political and economic
development. Although the principal focus is on the domestic politics of the PRC, the course includes
several lectures examining Chinas international relations.
221. Comparative Health Politics. (M) Lynch.
This course examines the relationship between politics and the health of populations in the worlds rich
democracies, including the Unites States. The key questions the course addresses are how and why
countries differ in their health care policies, public health policies, and policies that affect the social
determinants of health. There are no prerequisites, but prior coursework in comparative politics at the
100 or 200 level will be helpful.
SM 223. (GSWS225) ISSUES COMP POL/GENDER. (M)
Struggles over gender roles and rights have been prominent in the Middle East and North Africa since
the 19th century and continue to mark contemporary political and social discourses. Since the colonial
period, gender categories and sexualities have been critiqued and negotiated on behalf of empire, the
nation, modernity, personal freedom; today debates and struggles over global rights, islamic law, and
modernity continue to mark politics. Despite the particularity of ideas and events in the region, a
comparative framework helps to overcome exoticization of the region and develop a more acute
understanding. The topics of the course include engagement with the discourse of the Exotic Other,
the effects of modernity, the role of nationalism and the state, state-society negotiation, islamic
formulations, and continously, the question: where does change come from? Issues of the veil and
islamic dress the expansion of anti-gay laws, the disciplining of bodies in state and social settings these issues of gender and sexuality extend the realm of the political into intimate spaces.
Assignments include a midterm and a short paper that develops research and analytical skills. The
course is 200 level. While background in the study of the Middle East or gender is not necessary, an
introductory political science or social science course is required.
L/R 224. Political Economy of Development. (M) Kapur.
The course surveys some of the principal themes in the political economies of lower income countries.
The questions we shall seek to address cover a broad terrain. Who are the key actors? What are their
beliefs, interests and motivations? What are their constraints? How are these being affected by closer
economic linkages between national economies? While there is no single integrative framework or
paradigm into which these themes neatly fit, a common thread is the changing dynamics and interplay
between the local, the national, and the global. A familiarity with basic economic concepts will be
helpful, but is not necessary.
229. China's Domestic Politics. (M) Wang.Prerequisite(s): PSCI-219 or Permission of the Instructor.
This is an advanced course on the main issues of contemporary Chinese politics, economy and social
change. There is a strong focus on teh reform period (post 1978). We will spend considerable time and
energy on understanding the major themes and challenges of China's reforms, including the political
system, the legal system, the inequality, foreign direct investment, village elections, lawmaking,
environmental degradation, social opposition, corruption, and religion. We also investigate the many
political and social consequences of reform and changing landscape of Chinese politics. A prior course
on Chinese politics (for example, PSCI219) is a prerequisite of the course, or permission from the
instructor is needed.

Page 8 of 25

POLITICAL SCIENCE
(AS) {PSCI}
L/R 231. (AFRC232) Race and Ethnic Politics. (M) Gillion.
232. (COMM226) Introduction to Poltical Communications. (M) Jamieson.
This course is an introduction to the field of political communication, conceptual approaches to
analyzing communication in various forms, including advertising, speech making, campaign debates,
and candidates' and office-holders' uses of news. The focus of this course is on the interplay in the
U.S. between television and politics. The course includes a history of televised campaign practices
from the 1952 presidential contest onward.
238. Congress. (C) Lapinski.
This course is designed to introduce students to the study of Congress and of legislative behavior
generally. The course will examine legislative procedures, congressional institutions (committees,
subcommittees, leadership structure), campaigns and elections, legistative behavior (voting,
constituency service, policy leadership), and the policymaking environment (interest groups, executive
branch, media). Particular emphasis will be placed on consideration of whether and how electoral
concerns affect legislative behavior and the structure of congressional institutions. In addition, the
course will consider congressional behavior within the broader context of representation. There are no
prerequisites for this class, but students are expected to have at least a rudimentary understanding of
American politics and government.
233. Introduction to African American Politics. (M) Reed.
This course is an historical survey of the main bases and substances of politics among black
Americans and the relation of black politics to the American political order. Its two main objectives are:
1) to provide a general sense of pertinent historical issues and relations as a way of helping to make
sense of the present and 2) to develop criteria for evaluating political scientists' and others' claims
regarding the status and characteristics of black American political activity.
236. (PPE 202) The Public Policy Process. (A) Levendusky, Lapinski.
This course provides a comparison of policymaking in the United States. Throughout the course, we
explore how interests compete within institutions to turn ideas into public policies. We explore a variety
of different questions, including how many influences there are in the political process, what role
interest groups play, and why policy is so difficult to change.
237. The American Presidency. (A) Gottschalk.
This course surveys the institutional development of the American presidency from the Constitutional
convention through the current administration. It examines the politics of presidential leadership, and
how the executive branch functions. An underlying theme of the course is the tensions bewteen the
presidency, leadership, and democracy.
242. Business Govt & Pub Pol.. (M)
244. Elections & Engagement.

Page 9 of 25

POLITICAL SCIENCE
(AS) {PSCI}
251. (JWST248) ARAB ISRAELI RELATIONS. (C) Lustick.
In this course the Arab-Israeli dispute from 1948 to the present will serve as a vehicle for
understanding how domestic and global political processes interact to shape, contain, or aggravate
Middle Eastern wars between states and non-state actors. Particular stress will be placed on
understanding how wars affect international politics in states and political organizations and how
ideological and structural features of states and organizations find expression in wars and complicate
or enable the search for peach. In addition, the key features of the conflict will be interpreted as both a
clash between the political interests of national and/or religious groups and as a reflection of global
political power struggles. Attention will be given toward the end of the course to alternative ideas about
possible resolution of the conflict as well as to the increasingly prominent argument that, in this case,
there is no solution.
252. War, Strategy and Politics. (C) Horowitz.
This class examines the strategy and politics of warfare, focusing on the way actors plan military
campaigns and the factors that are likely to lead to victory and defeat. The course readings center in
particular on the factors driving changes in warfare and civil-military relations. The course will cover a
wide range of topics from theories of war-fighting to historical military campaigns to insurgency
warfare, terrorism, and the future of war.
253. (JWST253, PSCI553) International Politics of the Middle East. (B) Lustick.
This course will focus primarily on epidoes of external intervention by Great Powers in the politics of
Middle Eastern states. We shall begin by examining the emergence of the Middle Eastern state system
after the disappearance of the Ottoman Empire in the early part of the 20th century. This discussion
will provide opportunities to develop key concepts in the study of international politics and will serve as
crucial historical background. We shall then turn our attention to the primary concern of the course - a
systematic consideration of the motives, operational results, and long-term implications of a number of
important examples of intervention by Great Powers in the Middle East. Among the episodes to be
considered will be British policies toward the end of World War I, in Palestine in the 1930s, and, along
with the French, in Suez in 1956. Soviet intervention in the first Arab-Israeli war, in 1948, will be
analyzed along with Soviet policies toward Egypt in the early 1970s. American intervention in Iran in
1953 and in the Gulf War in 1991 will also be examined.
254. Politics of the European Union. (M) Staff.
This course explores the political economy of European integration. It is organized in three parts: First,
we analyze the political and economic forces that have driven the process of European integration
since World War II. We review the milestones of European integration in historical perspective and
discuss different theoretical perspectives explaining the path and outcome of European integration.
Second, the course takes an in-depth look at the institutions and decision-making processes of the
European Union (EU). It analyzes the structure and operation of the Council of Ministers, the
European Commission, the European Parliament, and the European Court of Justice, and explores
how these institutions interact to shape EU policy. Third, we examine EU policymaking in key policy
areas, including regulatory policies, redistributive politics, economic and monetary affairs, and external
relations.
258. (PSCI558) Human Rights. (C) Doherty-Sil.
What exactly should be considered a fundamental "human right"? What is the basis for something is a
fundamental human right? This course will examine not only broad conceptual debates, but will also
focus on specific issue areas (e.g., civil rights, economic rights, women's rights), as well as the
question of how new rights norms emerge in international relations.

Page 10 of 25

POLITICAL SCIENCE
(AS) {PSCI}
255. The Causes of War & Peace. (C) Weisiger.
The existence and endurance of war provides one of the most important puzzles of politics: why is it
that people keep making use of such a destructive and painful way of resolving their disputes? This
course addresses this question and the related question of what factors contribute to peace, focusing
on both academic and popular explanations for conflict, including among others anarchy, overoptimism, shifting power, diversionary war, the malevolent influence of war profiteers, and a variety of
explanations grounded in culture, religion and other ideational variables. In this discussion, we will
focus on both interstate and civil wars, and on both the onset and the eventual termination of war. At
various points in the course we will discuss a wide range of historical and contemporary cases,
including the World Wars, Vietnam, the Gulf War, the Iraq War, the various Arab-Israeli wars, the IndiaPakistan rivalry, and a number of recent civil conflicts such as the wars in Yugoslavia, Congo, and
Sudan. The course concludes with a discussion of strategies for managing ongoing conflicts and for
securing peace in post war settings.
256. (PSCI458, SAST284) International Relations of the United States and Asia. (C) Frankel.
This course is one of the first arising out of scholarship on cold war international history. It draws on
declassified government documents and other archival records to provide a window into the world-view
of decision-makers who need to make national security policy based on incomplete information about
ambiguous threats. The materials reveal a great deal about the importance of divergent historical
perspectives and strategic cultures in the foreign policy-making process. The main focus of the course
is on the intersection of the cold war and the rise of Asian nationalism. At the core of the analysis is the
clash between America's global strategy of military containment against the Soviet Union and the
assertion of Indian, and Chinese nationalism, concerned with preventing the United States from
succeeding to Great Britain's imperial rule. The course examines new patterns of power after the Cold
War, especially the emergence of two major powers in Asia - China and India - and the issues raised
by the U.S. unilateralist use of military power to preserve its predominant position.
257. (SAST256) International Relations of South Asia. (C) Frankel.
One of the great accidents of history is the Partition of the subcontinent into the two states of India and
Pakistan, and the onset of the cold war as a global struggle between the United States and the Soviet
Union. Indo-Pakistan wars over Kashmir, the dismantling of Pakistan by India and the creation of
Bangladesh, Pakistan's support for Al Qaeda and other terrorist groups, and the acquisition by both
countries of nuclear arsenals has marked the region as potentially the most dangerous area in the
world. This course analyzes the changing security environment from 1947 until the present inlcuding
the involvement of the United states, Soviet Union/Russia and China, and assesses the prospects for
averting chaos in greater South Asia.
SM 259. Chinese Foreign Policy. (M) Goldstein.Prerequisite(s): MUST HAVE TAKEN PSCI 219 OR
EQUIVALENT.
267. (RUSS123) INT'L AFF:RUSSIA&EASTEUR.

Page 11 of 25

POLITICAL SCIENCE
(AS) {PSCI}
271. (AFRC269, PPE 270) Constitutional Law: Public Power & Civil Rights to 1912. (C) Smith.
This course explores the creation and transformations of the American constitutional system's
structures and goals from the nation's founding through the period of Progressive reforms, the rise of
the Jim Crow system, and the Spanish American War. Issues include the division of powers between
state and national governments, and the branches of the federal government; economic powers of
private actors and government regulators; the authority of governments to enforce or transform racial
and gender hierarchies; and the extent of religious and expressive freedoms and rights of persons
accused of crimes. We will pay special attention to the changing role of the Supreme Court and its
decisions in interpreting and shaping American constitutionalism, and we will also read legislative and
executive constitutional arguments, party platforms, and other influential statements of American
constitutional thought.
272. American Constitutional Law II. Smith.
This course examines American constitutional development from the eve of WWI through the second
Obama administration. Topics include the growth of the New Deal and a Great Society regulatory and
redistributive state, struggles for equal rights for racial and ethnic minorities, women and GLBT
Americans, contests over freedoms of religion and expression, criminal justice issues, the Reagan
Revolution and the revival of federalism and property rights, and issues of national security powers
after September 11, 2001. Lectures are on videos and class time is devoted to in-depth discussions.
SM 275. (NELC282, RELS243) Muslim Political Thought. (M) Norton.
This seminar offers an introduction to Muslim political thought. Chrnologically the course ranges from
the medieval period to the present. Particular attention will be given in the later part of the course to
the renaissance of Muslim potical thought in recent years and to the development of political Islam,
including the work of such thinkers as Said Qutb and Hasan Turabi. We will also study the roots of this
renaissance in classical philosophy of the medieval period (Al Farabi, Al Ghazali, Ibn Khaldun, Ibn
Tufayl) and the liberal age.
SM 312. (AFST312) Democracy in Africa. (M) Staff.
In this course, we will examine the impact of historical context, leadership, constitutionalism, political
parties, civil society, economic reform, regime legitimacy, and the international community of the
democratic transition process in sub-Saharan Africa. Specific country case studies will be examined
both comparatively and regionally, given the increasingly interdependent nature of political and
economic transition on the continent. The goal of the seminar is to provide students with the tools
necessary to understand the democratic transition process in Africa in a way that is also relevant to
other regions in the world.
280. (GSWS280) Feminist Political Thought. (M) Society Sector. All classes. Hirschmann.
This course is designed to provide an overview of the variety of ideas, approaches, and subfields
within feminist political thought. Readings and divided into three sections: contemporary theorizing
about the meaning of "feminism";women in the history of Western political thought; and feminist
theoretical approaches to practical political problems and issues, such as abortion and sexual assault.

Page 12 of 25

POLITICAL SCIENCE
(AS) {PSCI}
L/R 282. (BIOE282) Lying, Cheating, Stealing, and Killing: How to Think About Professional
Ethics. Allen/Emanuel/Hirschmann/Strudler.
Professionals - in business, medicine, law, and politics - face myriad ethical dilemmas in their daily
work life that challenge, and sometimes conflict with, the moral commitments that guide their everyday
life. This course systematically examines the ethical dimensions of these four professional roles, asking
questions such as: Are there limits to what we should sell? How far should competitors go to "win"?
Who should get ventilators in a flu pandemic? Is it morally permissible for physicians to assist in
suicide? Should lawyers represent terrorists or child killers? How far does attorney-client privilege go?
Is it morally justifiable to torture enemy combatants? Should politicians lie?
SM 298. Selected Topics in Political Science. (C) Staff.
Consult department for detailed descriptions. More than one course may be taken in a given semester.
Recent titles have included: Leadership & Democracy; Conservative Regimes.
320. (GAFL509, URBS320) Who Gets Elected and Why? The Science of Politics. (C) Rendell.
What does it take to get elected to office? What are the key elements of a successful political
campaign? What are the crucial issues guiding campaigns and elections in the U.S. at the beginning of
the 21st century? This class will address the process and results of electoral politics at the local,
state,and federal levels. Course participants will study the stages and strategies of running for public
office and will discuss the various influences on getting elected, including: Campaign finance and
fundraising, demographics, polling, the media, staffing, economics, and party organization.Each week
we will be joined by guest speakers who are nationally recognized professionals, with expertise in
different areas of the campaign and election process. Students will also analyze campaign case
studies and the career of the instructor himself. Edward G. Rendell is the former Mayor of Philadelphia,
former Chair of the Democratic National Committee, and former Governor of Pennsylvania.
SM 327. (PSCI527) MODERN INDIA.
SM 330. PIW Semester Core Seminar: Conducting Public Policy Research in Washington DC.
(C) Martinez.
This seminar is taught in Washington D.C. for students enrolled in the Washington Semester Program.
It includes an orientation to observation and research in the Washington Community and a major
independent research project on the politics of governance.
SM 331. (LALS331) Latino Politics.
SM 332. (COMM332) Survey Research & Design. (M) Dutwin.
Survey research is a small but rich acadmic field and discipline, drawing on theory and practice from
many diverse fields including political science and communication.This course canvasses the science
and practice of survey methods,sampling theory, instrument development and operationalization, and
the analysis and reporting of survey data. Major areas of focus include measurement and research on
survey errors, application to election polling, new frontiers in data collection, overall development of
data management and introductory statistics.
SM 334. (COMM375) Emergency Response.

Page 13 of 25

POLITICAL SCIENCE
(AS) {PSCI}
SM 335. (HSOC335) Healthy Schools. (M) Summers.
This Fox Leadership and academically based community service seminar will use course readings and
students' own observations and interviews in their service learning projects in West Philadelphia
schools to analyze the causes and impact of school health and educational inequalities and efforts to
address them. Course readings will include works by Jonathan Kozol, studies of health inequalities
and their causes, and studies of No Child Left Behind, the CDC's School Health Index, recess, school
meal, and nutrition education programs. Course speakers will help us examine the history, theories,
politics and leadership behind different strategies for addressing school-based inequalities and their
outcomes. Service options will focus especially on the West Philadelphia Recess Initiative. Other
service options will include work with Community School Student Partnerships and the Urban Nutrition
Initiative.
SM 336. Congress, Elections and American Democracy. Lapinski.
SM 337. PRES.PRIMARIES&ELECTIONS.
SM 357. INTERNAT'L DEVELOP. POL..
SM 338. Statistical Methods PSCI. (M) Meredith.
The goal of this class is to expose students to the process by which quantitative political science
research is conducted. The class will take us down three separate, but related tracks. Track one will
teach some basic tools necessary to conduct quantitative political science research. Topics covered
will include descriptive statistics, sampling, probability and statistical theory, and regression analysis.
However, conducting empirical research requires that we actually be able to apply these tools. Thus,
track two will teach how to implement some of these basic tools using the computer program Stata.
However, if we want to implement these tools, we also need to be able to develop hypotheses that we
want to test. Thus, track three will teach some basics in research design. Topics will include
independent and dependent variables, generating testable hypotheses, and issues in causality.
Students are expected to have one semester of Calculus or permission of instructor. The class
satisfies the College of Arts and Science Quantitative Data Analysis requirement.
358. International Law. (M) Staff.
This course intends to familiarize the student with the concept of "law", its use as a constitutive and
regulative force in the international arena, and the expanding scope of international law through the
inclusion of transnational law and human rights.
SM 374. (COMM374) COMMUNICATION & CONGRESS. (M) Felzenberg.
SM 397. Topics in International Politics. (C) Staff.
SM 398. Selected Topics in Political Science. (C) Staff.
Consult department for detailed descriptions. More than one course may be taken in a given semester.
Recent titles have included: Sustainable Environmental Policy & Global Politics; Shakespeare and
Political Theory.
SM 404. (COMM404) Media and Politcs. (C)
SM 410. (COMM403) Compar Pol Communication. (B) Staff.

Page 14 of 25

POLITICAL SCIENCE
(AS) {PSCI}
SM 413. (GAFL530) Current Topics in Latin American Politics. (C) Faletti.
This course examines the empirical and logical validity of main arguments that connect the economy
and politics in Latin America. The focus will be on themes such as the agro-exporting economy, the
oligarchic state, import-substitution industrialization, bureaucratic-authoritarian regimes, transition to
and consolidation of democracy, and structural reforms.
SM 415. (COMM433) COMM & DEMOCRATIZATION. (C)
SM 418. (PPE 476) Evolution, Politics and Computer Simulation. (C) Lustick.
In this course we shall explore how recent developments in evolutionary theory relate to larger
questions raised by students of complexity and complex adaptive systems. We shall study how they
together provide a basis for important critiques of standard approaches in political science and enable
fascinating and powerful understandings of politics and political phenomena -- including national
identity and identity change, state formation, revolution, globalization, and leadership. An important
vehicle for the application of these insights for understanding politics is computer simulations featuring
agent-based modeling. Students will use "PS-I" an agent based computer simulation platform, to
develop their own models, conduct experiments, test hypotheses, or produce existence proofs in
relation to popular theoretical positions in contemporary political science. No knowledge of computer
programming is required.
SM 419. (LALS419) Democ & Decentralization. (M)
Are decentralization reforms fostering local community participation and improving the quality of
democracy in Latin America? Are they, insted, posing a threat to democracy and development? In the
last thirty years, Latin Ameican countries have undergone major reforms that devolved fiscal
resources, administrative responsibilities, and political authority from the central governments to the
states and municipalities. These decentralization reforms have radically altered the political landscape
in Latin America, even inthe countries that have since then tried to recentralize power, such as
Venezuela. What were the main causes of the decentralization movement? Who were the main
national and international actors who pushed forward these reforms? What have the main political,
fiscal, and policy consequences of decentralization been? These are some of the questions this
course will focus on. The experiences of decentralization in Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Bolivia,
Venezuela, and Mexico will be studied. Although prior knowledge of Latin American politics is not
required, additional readings will be assigned to the students who have not taken at least one
introductory course in Latin American politics, history or cultures.
431. Leadership & Democracy.
SM 433. (AFRC433) SOCIAL MOVEMENTS. (M)
SM 434. (AFRC434) Advanced Topics in American Politics. (M) Gillion.
This seminar is designed to serve as a "capstone" experience for advanced undergrduates interested
in American politics. It exposes students to some of the issues currently being studied and debated by
the leading scholars in the field. For each topic we will read works that take competing or opposing
positions on an issue; for example we will examine the current controversy over the causes and and
consequences of divided government. Students will write a research paper analyzing one of the
debates.
SM 441. THEORY PRACTICE&PURPOSE.

Page 15 of 25

POLITICAL SCIENCE
(AS) {PSCI}
SM 436. Political Psychology. (M) Margolis.
How do campaign advertisements influence voters' perceptions and behavior? What roles do emotions
play in politics? Do we all harbor some measure of racism, sexism, or homophobia, and what role do
these stereotypes play in political behavior? How and why do ideologies form, and how does
partisanship influence the way that voters understand the political world? How do people perceive
threat, and what are the psychological consequences of terrorism? These questions, and many others,
are the province of political psychology, an interdisciplinary field that uses experimental methods and
theoretical ideas from psychology as tools to examine the world of politics. In this course, we will
explore the role of human thought, emotion, and behavior in politics and examine the psychological
origins of citizens' political beliefs and actions from a variety of perspectives. Most of the readings
emphasize politics in the United States, though the field itself speaks to every aspect of political
science.
SM 437. (AFRC437, AFRC638, PSCI638) Race & Criminal Justice. (M) Gottschalk.
Why are African Americans and some other minority groups disproportionately incarcerated and
subjected to penal sanctions? What are the political, social and economic consequences for
individuals, communities, and the wider society of mass incarceration in the United States? What types
of reforms of the criminal justice system are desirable and possible? This advanced seminar analyzes
the connection between race, crime, punishment, and politics in the United States. The primary focus
is on the role of race in explaining why the country's prison population increased six-fold since the
early 1970s and why the United States today has the highest incarceration rate in the world. The class
will likely take field trips to a maximum-security jail in Philadelphia and to a state prison in the
Philadelphia suburbs.
SM 439. (COMM498, PSCI635) EXPER METHODS OF INQUIRY. (M)
SM 470. (URBS470) Executive Power in Metropolitan American Politics. (M) Rendell;Siskind.
Focusing on presidents, governors, and big-city mayors, this course will explore a wide range of
historical and recent examples of executive leadershi and decision-making. How do their actions in
office shape and get shaped by long-term historical and political forces? How and why do executive
office holders use (and occasionally abuse) their power? What opportunities exist t transform both
policy and public opinion? What kinds of constraints circumscribe the options available and limit the
impact of executive choices? Exploring presidents such as Franklin Roosevelt, Lyndon Johnson and
Barack Obama, governors including Ronald Reagan, Nelson Rockefeller and Bill Clinton and mayors
like Richard Daley, Sr. and Jr., Ed Koch, and Ed Rendell, this course at once examines the
personalities and predilections of individuals as well as the political ideas and institutions that shape
their time in office.
Registration in this course is by permission of the instructors only. To seek a permit for the course
please provide a short personal statement of not more than one page with the following information:
your name and contact information; your year; your major; other courses you have taken on related
subjects; how this course would fit into your larger academic and intellectual development; any other
personal or extenuating circumstances you think it would be useful for us to know about you. Email
personal statements to Peter Siskind (siskind@sas.upenn.edu) no later than April 3 and enrollment
decisions will be made by April 18.

Page 16 of 25

POLITICAL SCIENCE
(AS) {PSCI}
SM 481. Political Theory & Public Policy. (M) Hirschmann.
This course will explore the relevance of canonical work in modern political theory - Locke, Kant, Mill,
and Marx - to various public policy and practical political issues. We will consider what political
philosophy has to contribute to practical issues: not only what philosophy can tell us about the ethics of
practical issues, but also how public policy makers might utilize political philosophy to create better
policy. We will also explore whether and how reading political philosophy in light of specific concrete
issues encourages us to look at both the theories and the policies differently than if each were
considered on their own.
SM 496. DCC RESEARCH SEMINAR. (M)
SM 497. Political Science Honors. (C) Doherty-Sil.
This is a mandatory seminar for all students planning to submit an honors thesis for the purpose of
possibly earning distinction in Political Science upon graduation. The course is aimed at helping
students identify a useful and feasible research question, become familiar with the relevant literatures
and debates pertaining to that question, develop a basic understanding of what might constitute
"good" and "original" research in different subfields, and set up a plan for conducting and presenting
the research. The course is also aimed at building a community of like-minded student researchers,
which can complement and enrich the honor student's individual experience of working one-on-one
with a dedicated faculty thesis advisor. Students apply in the spring of their junior year for admissions
to the honors program and enrollment in PSCI497
SM 498. Selected Topics in Political Science. (C) Staff.
Consult department for detailed descriptions. Recent topics include: Globalization; Race & Criminal
Justice; Democracy & Markets in Postcommunist Europe.
SM 504. Urban Politics. (M) Staff.
The intention of this course is to prepare students for urban research in any setting. It is a graduate
level course, which reviews the intellectual traditions of the field and endeavors to establish the present
state of research. It is oriented to theory rather than case studies. It is comparative and international in
perspective though many of the sources are American. The latter reflect the intellectual milieu of
political science in the country where this University is located.
514. (EALC104, EALC504, PSCI214) Political Economy of East Asia. (M) Amyx.
This course begins by exploring the causes and consequences of the rise of industrial Asia, paying
particular attention to the role played by political institutions. It then examines the political economic
challenges faced in recenyears by many countries in this region. What explanations may be given for
the rapid growth experienced in the region? And, how can we reconcile the success of the past with
the difficulties experienced in more recent years? The role of national financial systems in supporting
or undermining growth and the politics of financial crisis management and financial system reform will
be explored in depth.
SM 505. The American Legislative Process. (M) Staff.
The theory of legislative process with a focus on the American Congress and its antecedents. The
evolution of legislative rules will be stressed. The evolution will be used to analyze Congressional
"reform." The course format is a combination of lectures, discussions, and guest speakers.

Page 17 of 25

POLITICAL SCIENCE
(AS) {PSCI}
SM 510. Electoral Systems. (M) Nagel.
This course examines alternative arrangements by which democracies choose leaders,
representatives, and governments through competitive elections. Some of the material is also relevant
to voting on policies in legislatures, committees, and referendums. The treatment is comparative and
theoretical, but students may focus on particular systems through reports and papers.
SM 511. (SAST528) Society and Politics in India. (M) Kapur, Frankel.
This course examines the experience of representative democracy in India and the country's
development record in a historical framework. It will ask questions such as: How did representative
democracy emerge in India, and what explains its persistence? What are the sources of its
vulnerability? What kind of a sense of nationhood does this democratic experience rest upon? What
are the exclusions built into this conception of nationhood? What is the relationship between India's
development experience and its democratic experiment? How have India's "traditional" institutions
adapted or failed to adapt to modern circumstances? Why has India performed well in certain
economic sectors even while its record in providing basic social services has been dismal? How have
the Indian State and its public institutions managed and coped with these changes? And how has
India's self-perception about its place in the world changed in recent years, and what are its
implicatons?
SM 515. (PSCI215) Political Institutions and Economic Performances. (C) Staff. Fulfills
Quantitative Data Analysis requirement
Comparative study of whether and how political institutions (political regimes, constitutional rules, party
and electoral systems) affect economic performance (economic growth, investment, income
distribution). This course fulfills the University's quantitative skills requirement.
SM 516. (AFST515) African Political Econ. (M)
517. (PSCI217) Russian Politics. (B) Sil.
This course will present an in-depth examination of political, economic and social change in postSoviet Russia within a historical context. After a breif discussion of contemporary problems in Russia,
the first half of the course will delve into the rise of communism in 1917, the evolution of the Soviet
regime, and the tensions between ideology and practice over the seventy years of communist rule up
until 1985. The second part of the course will begin with an examination of the Gorbachev period and
the competing interpretations of how the events between 1985 and 1991 may have contributed to the
collapse of the Soviet Union. We will then proceed to make sense of the continuities and changes in
politics, economics and society in contemporary Russia. Important topics will include the
confrontations accompanying the adoption of a new constitution, the emergence of competing
ideologies and parties, the struggle over economic privatization, the question of federalism and
nationalism, social and political implicatons of economic reform, and prospects for Russia's future in
the post-Yeltsin era.
This course may also be taken as a graduate seminar (PSCI 517) with the permission of the
instructor and the completion of additional requirements.
SM 519. (URBS519) Cities in the Global Econ.
SM 521. Comparative Business-State Relations. (M) Staff.
History and theory of the state's role in formation of modern industrial capitalism. Comparative
industrial policies, comparative industrial structure, business-state and state-labor relations, and
foreign economic relations. Emphasis on Western Europe but includes the United States and East
Asia.

Page 18 of 25

POLITICAL SCIENCE
(AS) {PSCI}
522. Public Administration. (M) Nagel.
This course focuses on three principal functions of leaders in public organizations: establishing and
instilling purpose, motivating cooperative effort, and making decisions based on undistorted
communication.
SM 525. (COMM525) Intro to Pol Comma.
SM 527. (PSCI327) MODERN INDIA.
SM 532. The Political Economy of North-South Relations. (M) Staff.
This course concerns the political economy of "North-South" relations. The seminar will investigate key
concepts and perspectives about the political economy of North-South relations by examining a variety
of attempts at economic transformation in Asia, Latin America, Africa, and Eastern Europe.
SM 533. Comparative Political and Economic Change. (M) Staff.
A comparative exploration of the politics and economics of the formation of states and the
development of capitalism, both historical and contemporary, and an examination of contending
theoretical perspectives about them. Examples will be taken from Europe since the sixteenth century,
nineteenth and twentieth century Latin America and Asia, and contemporary Africa.
SM 545. (EDUC595) POLITICS & EDUCATION.
SM 534. (AFRC533) Political Culture and American Cities. (M)
SM 535. (AFRC524) INEQUALITY & RACE POLICY. (M)
SM 552. Game Theory. (M) Weisiger.
This course provides an introduction to non-cooperative game theory and its applications to political
science. The goal of the course is to provide students with the background and understanding
necessary to read published game-theoretic work in political science journals. To that end, the course
covers the basic concepts of game theory, including Nash equilibrium and its main refinements,
simultaneous and sequential games, repeated games, evolutionary game theory, and games of
incomplete and private information. In addition, we will cover some of the central models used in
political science, notably models of public choice (such as the median voter theorem) and models of
bargaining.
SM 554. (LALS554) Politics of Global Environment. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Open to
undergraduates with permission of the instructor.
Research seminar on public security via the constraint of power (violence, states, arms) in domestic
and international politics. Examines devices (virtue, balance, separation, mixture and Constitutions);
applications in city-states (Greece & Rome), naval mercantile politics (Venice & Britain), the "Republic
of Europe," the USA (1787-1861), and nuclear arms control; and theorists (Polybius, Michiavelli,
Publius, Calhoun et al).
556. (PSCI152) American Foreign Policy. (M) Staff.
A detailed study of our foreign policy issues with special emphasis on (1) the international realities of
the 21st Century (2)the strategic challenges to our national security (3) the diplomatic options available
for regional conflict and (4) the moral imperatives of our global leadership

Page 19 of 25

POLITICAL SCIENCE
(AS) {PSCI}
SM 557. Politics of the Soviet Successor States and Eastern Europe. (M) Staff.
This course is an advanced research seminar on Soviet and post-Soviet politics. Students will be
expected to develop and complete a substantial research paper. Class sessions will center on recent
developments in the study of the politics of Russia and other Soviet successor states and on student
presentations of research in progress.
558. (PSCI258) Human Rights.
SM 560. The Organization of World Politics. (M) Staff.
This course examines the organizational features of international life. Instead of focusing on one or
several international organizations by means of an institutional analysis the scope of this course is
more analytical; it explores the role of norms in structuring interactions (informal organizations) as well
as the organizational designs of formal international organizations.
SM 566. Government and Politics of East Asia. (C) Staff.
This course will explore the changing character of the state in Japan and Korea (North and South),
and its relationship with the society and economy. The nature of politics in these countries will be
studied through political parties, pressure groups, and elections? Questions explored will include the
following: "Who governs?" How does the state in Japan and Korea differ from those in Western
nations? How did the state in these countries evolve and how did its relationship with the society
evolve? What role did the state play in developing respective economies?
SM 567. East Asian International Relations. (C) Staff.
This course will begin with an examination of the changing context of East Asian International
Relations & will survey the foreign policy strategies employedby the United States, the Soviet Union,
China, Japan and Korea since the turn of the century. This will be followed by analyses of interaction
among these countries. What were the forces, assumptions and motives behind each strategy? Who
chose the policy and why? How effective were various strategies? What are the problems underlying
various sets of relationships now? Who makes the decisions, and under what domestic and foreign
environment? What are the future prospects?
SM 568. Politics and Society in Modern India. (M) Frankel.
SM 580. Contemporary Political Philosophy. (M) Staff.
Significant contributions to political philosophy in the twentieth century. This course will alternate with
PSCI 581.
SM 582. (GSWS582) Gender Power and Feminist Theory. (M) Hirschmann.
This seminar will take up some of the "foundational" texts in contemporary feminist theory as well as
some of the newest work, to explore the ways in which power operates through gender and sex.
Subsidiary themes that will be developed include: the still relevant modernism/postmodernism debate
as it relates to feminism; the intersectionality of race, gender, sexuality and class and how feminists
can and do talk about "women"; the role of "the body" in relation to social constructivism; the relevance
of feminist theory to policy issues, and which theoretical approaches are the most appropriate or have
the most powerful potential. Room will be left on the syllabus for student input into the readings. This
course is open to undergraduates who have had some prior course work in GSWS and/or political
theory; undergraduates are advised to contact the professor to discuss their preparation before
enrolling.

Page 20 of 25

POLITICAL SCIENCE
(AS) {PSCI}
SM 583. American Political Thought. (M) Staff.
A consideration of one or a few topics, individuals, or eras in American political thought.
SM 596. Hegel and Marx. (M) Kennedy.
SM 584. (GSWS584) Political Philosophy. (M) Staff.
An examination of basic theoretical problems of political science divided into three parts. First, specific
features of social sciences will be examined and three most important general orientations of social
sciences (analytical, interpretative and critical) will be compared and analyzed. Second, basic
concepts of social and political sciences will be studied: social determination, rationality, social change,
politics, power, state, democracy. Third, the problem of value judgments will be considered: Is there a
rational, objective method for the resolution of conflicts in value judgments? Is morality compatible with
politics?
SM 586. Justice. (M) Kennedy.
A consideration of a fundamental political concept, justice, in the works of selected political
philosophers.
SM 590. The Nature of Political Science. (M)
The origins, development, and current status of the discipline and profession of political science.
SM 598. (PPE 475) Selected Topics. (C) Staff.
Consult department for detailed descriptions. More than one course may be taken in a given semester.
Recent titles have included: Race Development and American International Relations, Hegel and
Marx, and Logic of the West.
SM 600. International Relations Theory. (M) Staff.
This purpose of this course is two-fold. First, the survey course is designed to introduce students to a
wide range of theories of international politics. During the course of the semester we will examine neorealism, power transition theory, hegemonic stability theory, the modern world system, international
regimes and interdependence, the democratic peace, bureaucratic politics, organizational theory,
constructivism, and decision making theory. Second, the course will sharpen students' research design
skills. The written assignments require students to take the often abstract theories presented in the
readings and develop practical research designs for testing hypotheses derived from the theories. The
papers will not include data collection or the execution of actual tests. Rather, they will focus on the
conceptual problems of designing tests which eliminate competing hypotheses, operationalizing
variables, and identifying potential sources of data. Student's grades will be based on five short
research designs and discussion leadership.
SM 609. (COMM609) Comparative Pol Comm. (M)

Page 21 of 25

POLITICAL SCIENCE
(AS) {PSCI}
SM 610. Comparative Political Analysis. (M) Sil.
This seminar is aimed primarily at graduate students planning to take doctoral exams in comparative
politics. It provides a critical survey of the field of comparative politics, tracing the intellectual history of
the field, examining shifts in conceptual frameworks and research traditions, and comparing alternative
methodological approaches. The first half of the course generally examines how processes of political,
economic, and social change have been theorized in the social sciences from the mid-19th century to
the present. In this process, particular attention is paid to the bifurcation between theories that
emphasize the "universal" (e.g. the homogenizing effects of specific processes or variables) and the
"particular" (e.g. the persistence of distinctive historical legacies and trajectories). Since this bifurcation
is reinforced by distinct styles and methods of research, the seminar also probes the recent battles
between rational-choice, cultural, and structuralist scholars, while considering the trade-offs between
varieties of formal, quantitative, and qualitative methods. In the second half, the focus shifts to the
range of substantive problems investigated by scholars in the field of comparative politics.
These topics cover the complex relations among nations, states and societies; the origins,
consolidation, and patterns of democratic governance; political economy in relation to development
processes and social policies; the intersection of international/global economy and domestic politics;
the dynamics of revolutions and social movements; and alternative problematiques constructed from
the point of view of real actors such as workers, women, and local communities. In all cases, As a
whole, the course is designed to provide an introduction to important issues and debates that
comparativists have regularly engaged in; to help you understand the assumptions behind, and
differences between, particular approaches, methods, and styles of research; to examine whether
current debates are spurring new or better research in a given field in light of past approaches; and to
gauge whether there has been progress, fragmentation, or stagnation in the field of comparative
politics as a whole.
SM 614. Political Identity & Political Institution. (M) Staff.
SM 615. (COMM635) Political Economy of Development. (M) Staff.
This course examines the debate in development studies arising from recognition that economic
models, theories, methods, and strategies abstracted from the specific experience of western societies
and cultures do not have general applicability. A broader social science approach is adopted, one
which emphasizes the need to understand the social structures and cultures of the developing
countries, the capabilities of weak versus strong states, and the links with the international system that
influence transformative processes to which industrializing economies are subjected. The readings
offer an overview of the most influential theories of development and underdevelopment that structured
debate from the 1960's through the 1990's,and focus on the elements of these approaches that
advance understanding of development and stagnation in several key countries, including Brazil,
Mexico, India and selected countries in East and Southeast Asia.
SM 621. Power and Resistance in the United States. (M) Staff.
SM 616. Financial Statecraft. (M) Amyx.
This graduate level seminar explores the evolving political dynamics of 'FINANCIAL STATECRAFT'.
We will examine the relationship between financial flows and traditional foreign policy concerns,
seeking to understand why and how governments have attempted to harness or constrain financial
markets and institutions in the service of foreign policy goals. Specific topics include the introduction of
capital flow guraantees or restrictions, imposition of financial sanctions on non-state actors,
underwriting of roeign debt in currency crises, currency unions and other forms of currency
cooperation, and foreign exchange reserve management.

Page 22 of 25

POLITICAL SCIENCE
(AS) {PSCI}
SM 618. International Political Economy. (M) Mansfield.
Examination of the relationship between the international, political, and economic systems from a
variety of theoretical perspectives that have emerged in the postwar period, including liberalism,
transnationalism, statism, Marxism, and dependency.
SM 619. Strategic Studies Seminar. (M) Goldstein.
This seminar offers graduate students an introduction to the subfield of international relations labeled
strategic studies (or security studies). In addition to exploring key theoretical issues, we consider their
usefulness for understanding relevant events in international politics since World War II. Although the
course emphasizes the distinctive features of great power strategy in the nuclear age, we also look at
the continuing role of conventional forces, the strategic choices of lesser powers, and selected security
problems in the post-Cold War world (e.g., proliferation, terrorism).
SM 623. The Politics of Gender. (M) Norton.
This is a course on the categories and construction of gender, sex and sexuality. The literature is so
vast, the debate so vigorous, and the changing shape of thought so rapid that the absurdity of the
pretense to provide a "comprehensive" or a "definitive" account is more than usually evident. The
course foregrounds works that put gender, sex and sexuality - and with them the subject - in question.
One set of works is drawn from political and feminist theory and includes writings by Judith Butler,
Lacques Lacan, Guy Hocquenham, Monique Wittig, and Nancy Fraser. Through the use of works from
comparative politics and cultural studies, the interrogation of the sexual subject reveals itself as an
interrogation of political economies and political institutions. This aspect of the course addresses the
question of gender in relation to race, class, and diverse political situations, including those of
colonialism and liberalism, welfare policy and immigration law.
SM 631. American Political Development. (C) Gottschalk.
Analyzes important patterns of continuity and change in American politics by examining the
development of the American State from a comparative and historical perspective. Covers issues and
debates central to not only the subfield of American politics, but also the discipline of political science
more broadly. These include the role of the state, political culture, interests, ideas, and institutions in
politicadevelopment, and the role of history in political analysis. Open to advanced undergraduates
with the permission of the instructor.
SM 633. Hegemonic Analysis: Theories and Applications. (M) Lustick.
An important strain within contemporary political science has been the attempt to explain how power is
exercised through the manipulation or exploitation of consciousness, habits, and cultural
predispositions. One of the key concepts in the study of these issues is that of "hegemony" --the
establishment of particular beliefs as commonsensical presumptions of political life. In this course that
notion will be systematically explored. Of particular interest will be how authors who conduct
hegemonic analysis cope with the problem of analyzing the effect of what the objects of their analysis,
by definition, do not and, in some sense, cannot, think about. Illustrations of hegemonic phenomena
and attempts to analyze them will be drawn from a variety of fields, such as political theory,
historiography, comparative politics, American politics, rational choice theory,agent based modeling,
and epistemology.
SM 635. (COMM615, PSCI439) Exp Design & Iss Causal. (M)
SM 637. Survey American Institut. (M)
SM 638. (PSCI437) Race & Criminal Justice. (M)

Page 23 of 25

POLITICAL SCIENCE
(AS) {PSCI}
SM 649. Chinese Politics. (M) Goldstein.
This course is designed to provide a high-level introduction to the study of Chinese politics. After
surveying China's political history, we turn to a closer examination of several key issues in the
contemporary study of Chinese politics. The themes we cover include issues of political legitimacy,
political participation, policy formulation and implementation, revolutionary and reformist strategies of
political change, and the domestic and international influences on a regime's foreign policy.
SM 650. Development of American Political Institutions. (M) Staff.
A political and historical interpretation of current American political institutions and practice focused on
the federal system, the main national institutions, and various regime questions.
SM 652. American Politics. (M) Staff.
This seminar will survey the literature in a variety of subfields of American politics but will focus
primarily on American political institutions. Emphasis will be on exposing graduate students in the
seminar to the field of American politics, the methodologies employed in its study, the work of leading
scholars, and the topics currently being debated by those scholars. The course is also designed to lay
the groundwork to enable students to conduct original research. As such, the preparation of a research
design proposal will be a key part of the seminar.
SM 681. (PSCI181) Modern Political Theory. (M)
SM 655. (LALS655) Democracy in Comparative Perspective. (M) Staff.
SM 670. Recent Democratic Theory. (M) Nagel.
This seminar explores a series of interrelated debates that have important implications for the design
of democratic institutions, the expectations by which they are judged, and the spirit that animates
actions within them. The course makes no attempt to survey a vast literature, but the principal readings
have been selected because of their outstanding quality and influence.
SM 680. Constitutional Thought. (M) Staff.
A broadly theoretical approach to the constitutional dimension of the study of politics, with emphasis
on the problems of constituting a political form, the nature and authority of a constitution, and
systematic standards of interpretation, using the United States Constitution as an exemplar.
SM 690. The Logic of Social Inquiry. (M)
An introduction to the nature and development of theoretical knowledge in the social sciences with
emphasis on political science.
SM 692. (GAFL611) Advanced Statistical Analysis. (M) Staff.
SM 693. Research Methods in Political Science. (M) Staff.
An introduction to the design and execution of research to generate information about the nature and
behavior of political actors, organizations and systems. Techniques covered include unobtrusive
measures, case studies, direct observation, experimentation, content analysis and survey research.
Historical and interpretive approaches may also be covered.

Page 24 of 25

POLITICAL SCIENCE
(AS) {PSCI}
SM 694. Advanced Research Method. (C) Staff.
The purpose of this class is three-fold. First, the course is designed to introduce students to a wide
range of statistical models (e.g., event count models, limited dependent variables, and survival
analysis) as well as problems associated with statistical research (e.g., heteroscedasticity,
autocorrelation, and selection bias). Second, the course is designed to give students practical
experience in data analysis. Students will complete a number of assignments using a wide variety of
well know data sets (e.g., Polity III, World Value Systems, National Election Studies, Democratic and
Local Governance, Correlates of War, Militarized Interstate Disputes, International Crisis Behavior,
Penn World Tables, General Social Survey, United Nations Crime Survey). Third, the course will
explore the relationship between qualitative and quantitative analysis. Requirements will include
weekly assignments, discussion leadership, and a final paper. While PSCI692 is not a prerequisite for
this course, some prior exposure to statistical analysis (including regression) is recommended.
SM 798. (COMM798) Selected Topics in Political Science. (C) Staff.
Consult department for detailed descriptions. More than one section may be given in a semester.
Recent titles have included: Interpreting the Canon; State, Self, & Society; U.S. Policy in Europe; and
Dissertation Writing.
SM 805. (COMM706, COMM805) ANALYSIS ELECTION DATA. (M)

Page 25 of 25

