PSYCHOLOGY
(AS) {PSYC}
PSYC 001 is the prerequisite for Psychology courses numbered 100 and above. Students who
have received a 5 on the AP test in Psychology are encouraged to enroll in any 100-level course
offered.
L/R 001. Introduction to Experimental Psychology. (C) Living World Sector. All classes. Staff.
This course provides an introduction to the basic topics of psychology including our three major areas
of distribution: the biological basis of behavior, the cognitive basis of behavior, and individual and
group bases of behavior. Topics include, but are not limited to, neuropsychology, learning, cognition,
development, disorder, personality, and social psychology.
SM 070. Psychology of Food. Rozin. Does not count for the Psych major. To apply: http://
www.upenn.edu/curf/bfs/bfs-current-courses
097. PSYCH ABROAD. (C)
109. (BIBB109, BIOL109) Introduction to Brain and Behavior. (C) Living World Sector. All classes.
Staff.
Introduction to the structure and function of the vertebrate nervous system, including the physiological
bases of sensory activity, perception, drive, motor control and higher mental processes. The course is
intended for students interested in the neurobiology of behavior. Familiarity with elementary physics
and chemistry will be helpful.
L/R 111. (VLST211) Perception. (C) staff.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 001 or COGS 001.
How the individual acquires and is guided by knowledge about objects and events in their
environment.
121. Learning and Memory. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 001.
This course presents an analysis of the cognitive processes involved in learning and memory,
primarily in humans. We will survey the major findings concerning learning and memory discovered
using laboratory experiments and the major theories of learning and memory derived from those
findings. A major emphasis will be on the interplay between theory and data. Class assignments will
require the statistical analysis of data obtained from experimental studies, but no specific prior
background is required.
127. (BIBB227) Physiology of Motivated Behaviors. (C) Grill.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 001.
This course focuses on evaluating the experiments that have sought to establish links between brain
structure (the activity of specific brain circuits) and behavioral function (the control of particular
motivated and emotional behaviors). Students are exposed to concepts from regulatory physiology,
systems neuroscience, pharmacology, and endocrinology and read textbook as well as original source
materials. The course focuses on the following behaviors: feeding, sex, fear, anxiety, the appetite for
salt, and food aversion. The course also considers the neurochemical control of responses with an eye
towards evaluating the development of drug treatments for: obesity, anorexia/cachexia, vomiting,
sexual dysfunction, anxiety disorders, and depression.
L/R 149. (BIBB249) Cognitive Neuroscience. (C) Epstein.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 001 or COGS 001.
The study of the neural systems that underlie human perception, memory and language; and of the
pathological syndromes that result from damage to these systems.

Page 1 of 13

PSYCHOLOGY
(AS) {PSYC}
151. Language and Thought (formerly titled Cognitive Psychology). (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s):
PSYC 001 or COGS 001.
This course describes current theorizing on how the human mind achieves high-level cognitive
processes such as using language, thinking, and reasoning. The course discusses issues such as
whether the language ability is unique to humans, whether there is a critical period to the acquisition
of a language, the nature of conceptual knowledge, how people perform deductive reasoning and
induction, and how linguistic and conceptual knowledge interact.
L/R 160. Personality and Individual Differences. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 001.
This course provides an introduction to the psychology of personality and individual differences. Many
psychology courses focus on the mind or brain; in contrast to those approaches of studying people in
general, the focus in this course is on the question "How are people different from each other?" It will
highlight research that take a multidimensional approach to individual differences and attempts to
integrate across the biological, cognitive-experimental, and social-cultural influences on personality.
162. Abnormal Psychology. (C) Ruscio.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 001. The Psychology Department
does NOT issue permits for College of Liberal and Professional Studies (LPS) courses.
The concepts of normality, abnormality, and psychopathology; symptom syndromes;theory and
research in psychopathology and psychotherapy.
170. Social Psychology. (C) Society Sector. All classes. Staff.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 001.
An overview of theories and research across the range of social behavior from intra-individual to the
group level including the effects of culture, social environment, and groups on social interaction.
181. Intro to Developmental Psychology. (C) Brannon.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 001.
The goal of this course is to introduce both Psychology majors and non-majors majors to the field of
Developmental Psychology. Developmental Psychology is a diverse field that studies the changes that
occur with age and experience and how we can explain these changes. The field encompasses
changes in physicalgrowth, perceptual systems, cognitive systems, social interactions and and much
more. We will study the development of perception, cognition, language,academic achievement,
emotion regulation, personality, moral reasoning,and attachment. We will review theories of
development and ask how these theories explain experimental findings. While the focus is on human
development, when relevant, research with animals will be used as a basis for comparison.
193. Study Abroad.
231. (BIBB231, BIOL231) Animal Behavior. (C) Seyfarth/Cheney.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 00l or BIOL
102 or COGS 001.
The evolution of social behavior in animals, with special emphasis on group formation, cooperation
among kin, mating systems, territoriality and communication.

Page 2 of 13

PSYCHOLOGY
(AS) {PSYC}
L/R 207. (CIS 140, COGS001, LING105, PHIL044) Introduction to Cognitive Science. (C) Brainard/
Ungar.Prerequisite(s): An Introductory Course in Computer Science, Linguistics, Neuroscience,
Philosophy, or PSYC 001.
Cognitive Science is founded on the realization that many problems in the analysis of human and
artificial intelligence require an interdisciplinary approach. The course is intended to introduce
undergraduates from many areas to the problems and characteristic concepts of Cognitive Science,
drawing on formal and empirical approaches from the parent disciplines of computer science,
linguistics, neuroscience, philosophy and psychology. The topics covered include Perception, Action,
Learning, Language, Knowledge Representation, and Inference, and the relations and interactions
between such modules. The course shows how the different views from the parent disciplines interact,
and identifies some common themes among the theories that have been proposed. The course pays
particular attention to the distinctive role of computation in such theories, and provides an introduction
to some of the main directions of current research in the field. It is a requirement for the BA in
Cognitive Science, the BAS in Computer and Cognitive Science, and the minor in Cognitive Science,
and it is recommended for students taking the dual degree in Computer and Cognitive Science.
L/R 217. (BIBB217, VLST217) Visual Neuroscience. (B) staff.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 109.
An introduction to the scientific study of vision, with an emphasis on the biological substrate and its
relation to behavior. Topics will typically include physiological optics, transduction of light, visual
thresholds, color vision, anatomy and physiology of the visual pathways, and the cognitive
neuroscience of vision.
225. (BIBB270) Drugs, Brain, and Mind. (B) Nelson.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 109 or BIBB 109.
The course will begin with a review of basic concepts in pharmacology: routes of drug administration,
drug metabolism, the dose response curve, tolerance, and sensitization. Following a brief overview of
cellular foundations of neuropharmacology (cell biology,synaptic and receptor function), the course will
focus on various classes of drugs used to treat neuropsychiatric disorders including, among others,
depression, schizophrenia,and anxiety. We will additionally consider mechanisms mediating the mindaltering, addictive and neurotoxic effects of abused drugs.
235. (LING135) Psychology of Language. (C) Dahan.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 151 or LING 001.
This course describes the nature of human language, how it is used to speak and comprehend, and
how it is learned. The course raises and discusses issues such as whether language ability is innate
and unique to humans, whether there is a critical period for the acquisition of a language, and how
linguistic and conceptual knowledge interact.
239. (BIBB260) Neuroendocrinology. (C) Staff.
This course is designed to examine the various roles played by the nervous and endocrine systems in
controlling both physiological processes and behavior. First, the course will build a foundation in the
concepts of neural and endocrine system function. Then we will discuss how these mechanisms form
the biological underpinnings of various behaviors and their relevant physiological correlates.

Page 3 of 13

PSYCHOLOGY
(AS) {PSYC}
247. (BIBB247, PSYC549) Neuroscience and Society. (C) Farah.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 109 or
PSYC 149.
Cognitive, social,and affective neuroscience have made tremendous progress in in the last two
decades. As this progress continues, neuroscience is becoming increasingly relevant to all of the realworld endeavors that require understanding, predicting and changing human behavior. In this course
we will examine the ways in which neuroscience is being applied in law, criminal justice, national
defense, education, economics, business,and other sectors of society. For each application area we
will briefly review those aspects of neuroscience that are most relevant, and then study the application
in more detail.
253. (PPE 153) Judgment and Decisions. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): One semester of statistics OR
microeconomics.
Thinking, judgment, and personal and societal decision making, with emphasis on fallacies and
biases.
265. (PPE 203) Behavioral Economics and Psychology. (C) Bhatia.Prerequisite(s):
Microeconomics,AND PSYC 001.
This course will introduce you to the study of choice, and will examine in detail what we know about
how people make choices, and how we can influence these choices. It will utilize insights from
psychology and economics, and will apply these insights to domains including consumer choice, risky
decision making, and prosocial decision making.
L/R 266. Introduction to Positive Psychology. (B) Staff.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 001.
An introduction to the study of positive emotions, positive character traits, and positive institutions. The
positive emotions consist of emotions about the past (e.g., serenity, satisfaction, pride), about the
future (e.g., hope, optimism, faith), and emotions about the present (pleasure and gratification). The
distinction among the pleasant life, the good life, and the meaningful life is drawn. The positive traits
include wisdom, courage, humanity, justice, temperance, and spirituality, and the classification of
these virtues is explored. The positive institutions are exemplified by extended families, free press,
humane leadership, and representative government.
SM 311. (VLST212) Research Experience in Perception. (C) Rust.Prerequisite(s): One semester of
statistics, and one of the following: PSYC 111, 149, 151, 217, or permission of instructor. Dept
permission required. Undergraduates only.
In this research course, students will begin by first replicating earlier experiments to measure human
visual memory capacity. After several class discussions to discuss ideas, each student will design and
conduct their own experiment to further investigate visual and/or familiarity memory.

Page 4 of 13

PSYCHOLOGY
(AS) {PSYC}
275. (PPE 275) Introduction to Political Psychology. (C) Tetlock.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 001 or
COGS 001. NOTE: Students who are more interested in business-related issues may want Wharton
276x which is a modified version of this course specifically for Wharton undergraduates.
This course will explore psychological approaches to understanding political beliefs, attitudes, and
actions at the levels of both individual citizens and national leaders. It will also explore the possibility
that psychological science itself is not immune to the political debates swirling around it. Specific
topics will include: the workings of belief systems (and their power to shape what we "see"), cognitive
biases (and their power to cause miscalculations), sacred values and their role in stabilizing belief
systems and social interaction, personality and ideology (the linkages between the personal and the
political), and clashing conceptions of morality and distributive and corrective justice (striking
variations among people in what they consider to be fair). We shall also explore some topics that have
sparked controversy in the psychological research literature and that tend to polarize opinion along
political lines, including work on intelligence and unconscious bias.
280. Developmental Psychology. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 001. PSYC 280-601 is an LPS
class.
This course will cover theory and research related to the development of attachment, emotional
regulation, peer and intimate relationships, personality, moral reasoning, and emotional and
behavioral disorders. The course will emphasize the degree to which family, peer, and community
contexts influence development from infancy into adulthood. Efforts will be made to integrate biological
and environmental accounts of development across the lifespan.
281. Cognitive Development. (C) Swingley or Weisberg.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 001 or COGS 001.
What infants and young children come to know about the world, and how they learn it. Topics will
include changes in children's thinking, perceptual development, language acquisition, and current
theories of cognitive development.
SM 327. Research Experience in Behavioral Neuroscience. (C) Grill.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 127
and one semester of statistics. Dept permission required
Students conduct supervised experiments on the physiological basis of motivation. Topics will be
chosen from the intersection of issues in taste and nutrition, such as the ability of animals to take in
specific food substances needed to maintain themselves. Class meets for lecture, discussion, and
conduct of an experiment.
SM 362. Research Experience in Abnormal Psychology. Dr. Melissa Hunt.Prerequisite(s): PSYC
162 and one semester of statistics. Psych majors only. Instructor permission required. PSYC 362-301
is a two-semester course starting in the Fall.
PSYC 362-301 is a two-semester course starting in the Fall. Class size limited to 8 students.
SM 370. Research Experience in Social Psychology. Staff.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 170 AND one
semester of statistics. Dept permission required. Psychology majors only.
In this course, students will work in small groups to develop, empirically test , and report on a research
question within one of the domains of cultural psychology, such as emotion, motivation, social
perception, morality, or food and eating. Depending on the nature of the project, students will employ
survey,experimental, or observational research methodology, and learn how to to conduct and report
the appropriate statistical tests with Excel and/or SPSS (typically, correlations, t-tests, ANOVA and
ANCOVA, multiple regression, , factor analysis, and measures of reliability). Class discussions will
help students craft their projects, and in-class presentations will provide the opportunity to develop
and refine presentation skills. Psychology majors only. Class size is limited to 14 students.

Page 5 of 13

PSYCHOLOGY
(AS) {PSYC}
399. Individual Empirical Research. (C) Dept permission required
Individual research involving data collection. Students do independent empirical work under the
supervision of a faculty member, leading to a written paper. Normally taken in the junior or senior year.
SM 400. Senior Honors Seminar in Psychology. Thompson-Schill.Prerequisite(s): acceptance into
the Honors Program in Psychology. Dept permission required
Open to senior honors candidates in psychology. A two-semester sequence supporting the
preparation of an honors thesis in psychology. Students will present their work in progress and
develop skills in written and oral communication of scientific ideas.
SM 407. (BIBB451) Behavioral Genetics. (C) Price.Prerequisite(s): Basic statistics or permission of
instructor.
This course will cover basic principles of human and animal behavior genetics, including the genetics
of normal variation as well as extreme phenotypes represented by behavioral, psychiatric and
neurologic disorders. The course will focus on methods necessary to critically evaluate research
findings on normal and abnormal human behavior. Animal models will also be reviewed.
SM 411. Seminar in Perception. (C) Stocker.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 111.
421. (BIBB442, BIOL442, NGG 575) Neurobiological Basis of Learning and Memory. (C) staff.
This advanced course focuses on the current state of our knowledge about neurobiological basis of
learning and memory. Students will explore the molecular and cellular basis of learninginvertebrates
and vertebrates from a behavioral and neural perspective.
SM 423. (BIBB423) Seminar in Motivation. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): Permission of the instructor.
SM 431. (BIBB432, BIOL432) Seminar in Animal Cognition. (C) Cheney.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 231/
Biol 231/ BIBB 231.
The aim of this course will be to provide advanced undergraduates with a detailed review of a number
of research areas in behavioral ecology. Topics will change each year, and students will be able to
take the course more than once.
SM 429. SEMINAR HUMAN MEMORY. Kahana.Prerequisite(s): A background in (a) elementary
statistics and (b) computer programming, preferably using Matlab.
Advances in brain recording methods over the last decade have generated vastly more brain data
than had been collected by neuroscientists during the previous century. To understand the human
brain, scientists must now use computational methods that exploit the power of these huge data
sets.This course will introduce you to the use of big data analytics in the study of human memory and
its neural basis. Through hands-on programming projects, we will analyze multi-terabyte data sets
both to replicate existing phenomena and to make new discoveries. Although the course has no formal
neuroscience or psychology prerequisites it does require a background in (a) elementary statistics
and (b) computer programming, preferably using Matlab.
SM 435. Psycholinguistics. Dahan.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 151, or PSYC 235, or LING 001, or
permission of instructor.

Page 6 of 13

PSYCHOLOGY
(AS) {PSYC}
SM 439. (BIBB460) Neuroendocrinology. (C) Flangan-Cato.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 109.
This course is designed to examine the various roles played by the nervous and endocrine systems in
controlling both physiological processes and behavior. First, the course will build a foundation in the
concepts of neural and endocrine system function. Then, we will discuss how these mechanisms form
the biological underpinnings of various behaviors and their relevant physiological correlates. We will
focus on sexual and parental behaviors, stress, metabolism, neuroendocrine-immune interactions,
and mental health.
440. SLEEP AND SLEEP DISORDER.
SM 449. Seminar in Cognitive Neuroscience. DiRocco (449-601) or Epstein (449-301).Prerequisite
(s): PSYC 149 or BIBB 249. PSYC 449-601 is an LPS course.
Topics vary each semester.
SM 451. (BIBB431) Seminar in Cognitive Psychology. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 231.
Topics vary each semester.
SM 453. (PPE 475) Seminar in Decision Making. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 253 (formerly
PSYC 153). Undergraduates only.
Topics vary each semester.
SM 462. Seminar in Abnormal Psychology. staff.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 162. Undergraduates only.
Topics vary each semester.
SM 464. Seminar in Personality. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 160.
Topics vary each semester.
SM 466. Seminar in Positive Psychology:Imagination and Creativity in Psychology. Forgeard
and Seligman.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 001. Instructor permission required. Course does not fulfill the
research requirement for psych majors.
By forming mental representations of things not immediately present to the senses (imagination), and/
or simulating possible futures (prospection), humans can generate novel ideas and products
(creativity) that contribute to human progress and flourishing. This course will specifically focus on
imagination and creativity within the field of psychology. Students will learn about the cognitive,
motivational, and social processes that shaped important creative insights (or big moments) in the
history of the discipline. In addition, students will be given the opportunity to apply knowledge gained
from the course by designing their own original creative research proposal as the final project for the
course. Note: This course constitutes a research study designed to investigate how scientific creativity
can best be taught to undergraduate students. Student participation in the research study is voluntary,
subject to informed consent, and will not affect their performance in the course.
SM 470. Seminar in Social Psychology. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 170. Undergraduates only.
Topics vary each semester.

Page 7 of 13

PSYCHOLOGY
(AS) {PSYC}
SM 472. Evolutionary Psychology. (C) Kurzban.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 272.
The purpose of this seminar is to explore state-of-the-art research and theory in the discipline of
evolutionary psychology, with an emphasis on particularly challenging problems such as the evolution
of conscious experience (phenomenology) and human (pro-)social behavior, especially altruism,
cooperation, and morality. By the end of the class, students should be familiar with the current
avenues of research in these areas and the controversies that surround these areas.
SM 473. (BIBB473) Neuroeconomics. (C) Kable.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 149, 253, or 265.
This course will review recent research that combines psychological, economic and neuroscientific
approaches to study human and animal decision-making. A particular focus will be on how evidence
about the neural processes associated with choices might be used to constrain economic and
psychological theories of decision-making. Topics covered will include decisions involving risk and
uncertainty, reinforcement learning, strategic interactions and games, and social preferences.
SM 474. Cultural Psychology. Staff.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 170 or PSYC 272.
Humans are a cultural species, constantly navigating a complex web of culturaly bound practices,
norms, and worldviews. This seminar will survey the theory and research of the young but rapidly
expanding field of cultural psychology. In the seminar, we will explore how culture shapes and is
shaped by an array of psychological domains, ranging from perception, information processing, and
language, to concepts of the self, motivations, emotion, morality, and physical and mental health.
SM 475. (PPE 475) Behavioral Law and Economics. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 253 or PSYC
265. Undergraduates only.
Topics vary each semester.
SM 481. Seminar: Cognitive Development. Swingley.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 281 or PSYC 280.
SM 477. Seminar in Animal Behavior. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 131/231.
Seminar in Animal Behavior: Social Brains, Social Behavior, and Social Evolution. This course will take
an integrative approach to the study of social behavior across a variety of animal species. We will
primarily take an ecological approach to studying social behavior at different levels of analysis,
including physiological mechanism, development, and function.
SM 478. (PPE 475) OBEDIENCE. Royzman.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 170.
Though almost half a century old, Milgram's 1961-1962 studies of "destructive obedience" continue to
puzzle, fascinate, and alarm. In this seminar, we will take an in-depth look at these famous studies
(along with the more recent replications) and explore their various psychological, historical, and
philosophical ramifications. This course has a number of intellectual goals that go beyond simply
rarifying one's understanding of a particular content area (important and generative as it may be). One
such a goal is to enable you to think critically (though not disparagingly) about other people's researh
and theoretical claims that ensue from it, all with the hope that you can then apply the self-same
critical acumen to your own future work. Second, this course will offer a hospitable environment for
developing (and exchanging) creative ideas of your own. Your work on your individual reaction papers
and on the term paper in particular will be a key element in achieving this goal.
SM 480. Seminar in Developmental Psychology. Staff.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 001. Undergraduates
only.
511. PROB MODELS OF PERCEPTIO.

Page 8 of 13

PSYCHOLOGY
(AS) {PSYC}
L/R 547. FNDTIONS SOC COG NEUROSC.
549. (PSYC247) NEUROSCIENCE AND SOCIETY.
579. EXP METHODS PERCEPTION.
671. (CRIM671) Violence: A Clinical Neuroscience Approach. (A) Raine. Graduate students only.
Developed for both Psychology and Criminology graduate students, this interdisciplinary course
outlines a clinical neuroscience approach to understanding violence in which the tools of
neuroscience- neuroanatomy, neurophysiology, neurocognition, neuroendocrinology,
neuropharmacology, molecular and behavioral genetics- are used to help inform the etiology and
treatment of violence. Clinical components include psychopathy, proactive and reactive aggression,
homicide domestic violence, conduct disorder, oppositional defiant disorder, antisocial personality
disorder, crime, and delinquency as well as their comorbid conditions (schizophrenia, drug abuse,
hyperactivity). The interaction between social, psychological, and neurobiological processes in
predisposing to violence will be highlighted, together with neurodevelopmental perspectives on
violence focusing on prospective longitudinal and brain imaging research. Key implications for the
criminal justice system, neuroethics, forensics psychology, and intervention will also be outlined.
SM 712. REGRESSION & ANOVA II. (C)
SM 790. (COMM890) SELF-REGULATION & BEHAV. ALBARRACIN.
This seminar will cover psychologicaltheories of goals, research on self-control, and models of
behavior change, tailored to the interests of the students. We will read classic and contemporary
research related to goal setting, conscious and unconscious goal processes, and mechanisms of
behavior change.
251. Special Topics in Cognitive Psychology. (C) staff.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 151. Topics for this
course vary each semester. Dept permission required.
SM 270. CULTURAL PSYCHOLOGY. (C)

First-Year Graduate Courses
501. (COGS501, LING545) Mathematical Foundations for Language and Communication
Science I. (D) Liberman.
This two-semester sequence will provide basic mathematical modeling and algorithmic tools for
interdisciplinary research in animal, human or machine communication, in association with the IRCS
IGERT program. Topics include signal processing, statistical modeling and machine learning,
information theory, game theory, and formal language theory. The courses will be taught in a
laboratory setting, and will emphasize practical skills as well as basic concepts.
502. (COGS502, LING546) Mathematical Foundations for Language and Communication
Science II. (D) Liberman.
This two-semester sequence will provide basic mathematical modeling and algorithmic tools for
interdisciplinary research in animal, human or machine communication, in association with the IRCS
IGERT program. Topics include signal processing, statistical modeling and machine learning,
information theory, game theory, and formal language theory. The courses will be taught in a
laboratory setting, and will emphasize practical skills as well as basic concepts.

Page 9 of 13

PSYCHOLOGY
(AS) {PSYC}
539. (BIBB585, NGG 594, PHYS585) Theoretical and Computational Neuroscience. (M)
Balasubramanian.
This course will develop theoretical and computational approaches to structural and functional
organization in the brain. The course will cover: (i) the basic biophysics of neural responses, (ii) neural
coding and decoding with an emphasis on sensory systems, (iii) approaches to the study of networks
of neurons, (iv) models of adaptation, learning and memory, (v) models of decision making, and (vi)
ideas that address why the brain is organized the way that it is. The course will be appropriate for
advanced undergraduates and beginning graduate students. A knowledge of multi-variable calculus,
linear algebra and differential equations is required (except by permission of the instructor). Prior
exposure to neuroscience and/or Matlab programming will be helpful.
605. (NGG 582, PHRM540) Behavioral Neuropharmacology. (C) Lucki and Staff.Prerequisite(s):
Permission of course director.
The effects of various drug classes on animal behavior are examined. Behavioral studies identifying
the neurochemical mechanisms of action of psychotropic drugs are reviewed. Animal models of
neurological and psychiatric illnesses are discussed.
SM 600. Proseminar in General Psychology. (C) Staff. Dept permission required
Choice of half or full course units each sem. covering a range of subjects and approaches in academic
psychology.
SM 603. (NGG 595) Behavioral Neuroscience. (H) Grill. Fulfills the "Brain" requirement
Current research on the neural basis of behavior is organized in six subsections: animal
communication, sex behavior, circadian rhythms, variety energy and water balance, synaptic plasticity
and learning, andcommunication, addiction. Topics are selected based on excitement surrounding
recent research developments. Each topic is analyzed initially at thernal receptors behavioral level,
followed by the systems and the cell and molecularntrol of levels. Throughout the course, attention is
paid to the analysison of behavior interesting stereotyped behaviors, e.g., bird song, lordosis, licking,.
whose description and neurology has provided insights into the neuralal basis systems that contribute
to overall neural control of behavior. Attention is also paid to the development of understanding of the
neuroanatomy of selected neural systems.
SM 604. (NGG 592) Cognitive Neuroscience. (C) Farah.
Review of what has been learned about the neural mechanisms underlying intelligent behavior in
humans and animals. Traditional topic areas of cognitive science are covered, specifically: vision (early
vision through object recognition), attention, learning and memory, motor control, planning and
problem-solving, and language. Attempts are made to integrate results of different neuroscience
approaches to each topic, including the study of human neurological patients, lesion studies in
animals, single unit recordings, neural network modelling, and functional imaging techniques.
608. (OIDD900) Judgment and Decisions. (C) Baron.
Thinking, judgment, decision making, beliefs, and probability, with emphasis on faclacies and errors.
609. (NGG 573) Systems and Integrative Neuroscience. (A) Staff. Fulfills the Brain requirement
610. (STAT501) Mathematics for Psychologists. (M) Staff. A two-term course.
611. (BSTA550, STAT500) Statistics for Psychologists. (A) Staff.

Page 10 of 13

PSYCHOLOGY
(AS) {PSYC}
612. (STAT501) Introduction to Nonparametric Methods and Log-linear Models. (B) Staff.
SM 630. (NGG 630) Cognitive Neuroscience of Memory. (C) Staff. Fulfills the Brain requirement
This course will review the neural mechanisms of learning and memory. Readings will include both
seminal and cutting-edge papers on topics ranging from perceptual memory to higher order functions,
including working memory, declarative memory, skill learning, and semantic memory. Within each topic
we will attempt to integrate the results of different neuroscience approaches, including the study of
human neurological patients, lesion studies and single unit recordings in animals, neural network
modeling, event-related potentials, and functional imaging techniques.
631. (NGG 631) Cognitive Neuroscience of Affect. (C) Farah.
We will survey, and as far as possible, snythesize, three bodies of literature on emotion and the brain,
specifically: (1) neuroimaging and pharmacologic studies of emotion and the normal human brain; (2)
the neuroscience of affective disorders in humans; and (3) relevant studies of reinforcement and
learning in animals.
632. (NGG 632) Cognitive Neuroscience of Vision. (C) Epstein.
This course will review the neural basis of visual cognition. Emphasis will be placed on linking
cognitive theory to neuroscientific methods. Topics will include object and face recognition, scene
perception, visual attention, mental imagery, and visual awareness.
699. Individual Research for First-Year Graduate Students. (E)
SM 705. Neuroethics. (C) Farah. Dept permission required.
Neuroscience is increasingly affecting all aspects of human life, from the relatively familiar medical
applications in neurology and psychiatry, to new applications in education, business, law,and the
military. Today's neuroscience graduate students will be among the scientists, citizens,and
policymakers who will lead society through the maze of decisions regarding the appropriate uses of
neuroscience.This course provides a survey of the key ethical, legal,and social issues at the
intersection of neuroscience and society.It will include a combination of traditional classroom lectures,
discussion and debates, as well as an online component coordinated with a course at Wisconsin's
Neuroscience and Public Policy graduate program.
SM 715. Teaching Seminar. (C) Rozin.Prerequisite(s): For graduate students in Psychology.
This course is designed to aid graduate students in developing fundamental teaching skills. The focus
will be on lecturing, applicable to job talks as well as classroom lectures, but there will also be some
attention to discussion sections and handling of questions.

Seminars
SM 703. Special Topics in Psychology. (C) Staff.
SM 719. Experimental Methods in Perception. Brainard. This is an IGERT foundational course.
This IGERT foundational course covers experimental methods and data analysis techniques used in
the study of human perception.

Page 11 of 13

PSYCHOLOGY
(AS) {PSYC}
SM 704. Research Methods and Statistical Procedures for Social and Clinical Sciences. (C)
Staff.
This course has three primary objectives: 1) developing criteria and strategies for strong inference of
causal relationships in social and clinical psychology research; 2) examining the array of research
designs employed in the social/clinical sciences together with the threats to internal and external
validity associated with each; 3) learning and applying statistical analytical methods appropriate for
questions in the social/clinical sciences. The course will employ a seminar format and a projectoriented approach to learning. Students will be encouraged to utilize examples from their own
research programs in applying the design and analysis concepts covered in the course.
SM 709. Special Topics in Clinical Psychology. (C) Staff. Graduate students only.
In this seminar we will survey substantive, methodological and statistical issues that arise in the
planning, conduct, and interpretation of empirical inquiries about the effects of psychotherapies.
Challenges presented in efforts to disseminate evidence-based clinical practices will also be
addressed.
SM 711. Basic Problems in Developmental II. (C) Staff.
SM 730. Special Topics in Motivation. (C) Staff.
SM 733. Special Topics in Vision. (C) Staff.
SM 736. Special Topics in Language. (C) Staff.
SM 739. Special Topics in Perception. (C) STOCKER.
Probability theory has become an increasingly popular and successful framework for modeling human
perceptual and cognitive behavior. This course will provide a careful introduction to probability theory
and the various ways it has been applied in psychology and neuroscience. Goal is to make students
understand the most important state-of-the-art probabilistic models in perception and cognition, what
they reveal about the brain's underlying computations and strategies in dealing with uncertainty, and
how such computations can potentially be performed by populations of neurons.
SM 745. (NGG 583) Special Topics in Cognitive Neuroscience. (C) Staff.
750. (NGG 576, PHRM550) Special Topics in Neuropsychopharmacology. (C) Lucki and
Staff.Prerequisite(s): Permission of Instructor.
Biological issues relevant to neuropsychiatric illnesses are covered in detail in four sections. The first
section covers clinical aspects of major psychiatric disorders and includes some contact with patients.
The second section presents the neuroanatomy of the limbic systgem. In the third section, emphasis
is on the mechanisms of action of psychotropic drugs, including antidepressants, antipsychotics,
anxiolytics, and stimulants. The final section covers information relevant to understanding biological
processes that may be abnormal in neuropsychiatric illnesses, such as stress, sleep, and circadian
rhythms, as well as quantitative genetics.
SM 751. Special Topics in Cognitive Psychology. (C) Staff.
SM 757. Language and Communication Sciences Research Seminar. (M) Trueswell.
SM 770. (PSCI770) Special Topics in Social Psychology. (C) Staff.

Page 12 of 13

PSYCHOLOGY
(AS) {PSYC}
SM 810. Psychodiagnostic Testing. (A) Staff.
SM 811. Psychodiagnostic Interviewing. (A) Staff.
SM 815. Introductory Practicum. (B) Staff.
SM 820. Advanced Practicum. (C) Staff.
Intensive studies of single individuals including interviews, tests, and experiments; also clinical
experience at appropriate community agencies.
999. Individual Study and Research. (C)

Page 13 of 13

