PUBLIC HEALTH STUDIES
(MD) {PUBH}
500. (NURS570) Introduction to Public Health. (A)
This course will provide a topical overview of the inter-disciplinary field of public health and provides
grounding in the public health paradigm. Through a series of lectures and recitation sessions,
students will learn about the history of public heatlh and the core public health sciences including
behavioral and social sciences, biostatistics, epidemiology, environmental health, and policy and
management. Other topics include ethics in public health, context analyses (specifically sociographic
mapping and urban health), community participation in research, public health promotion, and the
prevention of chronic and infectious diseases.
501. INTRO TO BIOSTATS. (C) Shofer, Bunin.
Introduction to Biostatistics This course is designed to provide a broad overview of biostatistics
methods as well as applications commonly used for public health research. Topics covered include
measurement and categorizing variables, use and misuse of descriptive statistics, testing hypotheses,
and applying commonly used statistical tests. An emphasis will be placed on the practical application
of data to address public health issues, rather than theoretical and mathematical development.
Students will learn how to choose and apply statistical tools to data sources, when and how statistical
tools can be used to analyze data, and how to interpret others' quantitative studies. Students will gain
experience using online datasets and the STATA statistical software package.
502. (NURS500) Introduction to the Principles and Methods of Epidemiology. (C) Buttenheim,
Cannuscio.
Epidemiology is a conbination of a subject matter science and research methodology. Introduction to
Principles and Methods of Epidemiology focuses on the latter component. The course introduces
study designs applied to human populations, including randomized trials and four types of
observational studies (cohort, case-control, cross-sectional, ecological). Because cause- and-effect
relations are at the heart of epidemiologic research, numerous related topics are taught, including
causal inference, and bias.
503. Environmental and Occupational Health. (A) Emmett, Howarth, Pepino.
This course will provide a broad introduction to the scientific basis of occupational and environmental
health. Content will address issues in the ambient, occupational and global environments as well as
the tools, concepts and methods used in environmental health.
504. Public Health Theories & Frameworks. (C) Schnoll, Fleisher.
This course provides students with a solid foundation in behavioral and social science theory,
research, and interventions as they pertain to public health. Content will provide exposure to a broad
range of theories, including the theoretical foundations of social science applications for help-seeking,
gender, race, ethnicity and social class. These theories will be discussed using examples of their
applications to numerous public health problems including HIV/AIDS, violence, cancer, cardiovascular
diseases, obesity, and diabetes.
505. Public Health Policy and Administration. (A) Noonan, Klusaritz.
This course is an introduction to health policy and management. It examines both the historical and
current state of health policy in America and integrates these concepts within the context of public
health practice. We will examine key concepts in understanding US health care organization, financing
and delivery, our current political and economic debate on health care reform, exmamining the role
and management issues of public health departments, and case studies in public health policy and
management.

Page 1 of 7

PUBLIC HEALTH STUDIES
(MD) {PUBH}
506. Methods for Public Health Practice. (C) Solomon, Hall.
This is a course designed around modules whose objective is to provide students with greater
familiarity in a range of methods essential to public health practice. The course will be framed around
an indepth capacity and needs assessment and community public health planning in Philadelphia.
Topics covered will include data collection and evaluation, both quantitative and qualitative, uses of
informatics in public health, analysis of vital statistics, working with communities, methods for
developing and facilitating solutions to public health problems, including concepts of advocacy and
policy formation and development of interventions. The course demonstrates how core public health
competency areas in data analysis and communication provide foundations for applications for both
practice and practice-based research.
507. Public Health Law & Ethics. (A) Noonan, Anderson.
What is best - or, at least, seems best -- for the public's health is not always consistent with society's
view of what is legal, ethical, or good policy. This course introduces key concepts of legal, ethical, and
policy analysis and attempts to demonstrate with current examples how these forces empower, guide,
and constrain public health decision-making and actions. The course will combine lecture, Socratic
dialogue, and group discussion in an informal setting. The course will feature guest lectures by several
distinguished experts from Penn and from other universities.
508. Capstone Seminar I. (F) Frasso, Anderson, Levy, Grisso.
The Capstone is a culminating experience required for graduation in the Master of Public Health
Program. In two Capstone seminars, students will have an opportunity to synthesize the knowledge
and public health competencies they have developed through their coursework. Capstone students
will apply their knowledge and skills to public health problems in a chosen area of interest. They will
engage their peers in scholarly discussion, drawing from relevant scientific literature and public health
experience in order to begin to develop a common grounding and identity as public health
professionals. The Capstone incorporates two semester-long seminars and a research project. over
the course of the Castone, students will develop, propose, revise, implement, and present their
projects. As their projects successfully come to fruition they will also adivse their junior colleagues still
in the proposal stage.
515. (CPLN622) COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT. (B)
517. (EPID518) Introduction to the Epidemiologic Study of Geography and Health. (A) Branas,
Weibe.
This course will provide an introduction to GIS in public health research and practice. Through a
series of lectures and labs students will explore theories linking health and the environment, spatial
analysis and spatial epidemiology, and applications of GIS-related data collection and analysis.
L/R 519. Issues in Global Health. (A) McLaughlin.Prerequisite(s): Undergraduates must have
completed HSOC-010-401.
This course presents an overview of issues in global health from the viewpoint of many different
disciplines, with emphasis on economically less developed countries. Subjects include: millennium
goals; measures of disease burden; population projections and control; environmental health and safe
water; demography of disease and mortality; zoonotic infectious diseases; AIDS and HIV prevention;
vaccine utilization and impact; eradication of polio virus; chronic diseases;tobacco-associated disease
and its control; nutritional challenges; social determinants of global health; harm reduction and
behavioral modifications; women's reproductive rights; health economics and cost-effective
interventions; health manpower and capacity development; bioethical issues in a global context.

Page 2 of 7

PUBLIC HEALTH STUDIES
(MD) {PUBH}
SM 527. Media, Advocacy and Public Health. (M) TBA.
This course will examine the ways in which the media can be used as a tool to improve health. It will
also investigate the ways in which the media has had anegative impact on health behaviors in the
population. Looking at specific topics like tobacco, food and nutrition, and HIV/AIDS, we will explore
the intersection of media, advocacy, advertising and entertainment and the impact of media broadly
on health behavior and society. The course will also provide students the opportunity to practice
strategically working with the media to address health problems.
521. Program Evaluation in Public Health. (K) Karpyn.
There are many public health programs developed to promote change. The question most funders
have for public health programs is: what outcomes do youexpect? This course is designed to review
the principles of identifying short term, mid term and long term outcomes and methods of
measurement. Students learn about the application of date collection skills to all phases of developing
a public health program or service innovation, from needs assessmentto analysis of finding to
implementation of changes based on results. Studentslearn to appreciate how these skills can be
used as practical tools for identifying public health problems, program development, program
implementationincluding taking a reflective practice approach, ensuring equity and fairness in
program delivery (i.e. combating disparities), and generally prmoting publichealth through effective
and efficient programmatic efforts.
525. Developing Effective Public Health Programs Using a Humans Rights Based Approach. (L)
Voet.
This course will engage students in discussion of how a human rights approach, informed by
international human rights declarations and covenants as well as gender theory, can more
comprehensively inform the development of a variety of public health programs. Specifically, the class
will discuss how health policies, programs and practices can impact on human rights (e.g. mandatory
reporting of certain communicable diseases, quarantine, accessibility of services, etc.); how violations
of human rights affect health (e.g. torture, discrimination, etc.) and how health and human rights are
ultimately inextricably linked and programming for public health must use a framework that ensures a
balance of interests between the two disciplines.
526. (ANTH426) Anthropology and Public Health. (M) Barg. In this course, we examine three types
of relationships between anthropology and public health. Anthropology and public health will examine
complementary and competing concepts fundamental to each discipline and ways that these
concepts make it essential and difficult for the disciplines to work together. Antrhopology on public
health takes a critical look at assumptions in public health praxis. Anthropology in public health will
focus on ways that anthropology theory and methods inform the practice of public health. Using these
three approaches, we will examine topics in public health such as mental health, health promotion/
disease prevention communication, cancer disparities, reproductive health, violence and infectious
disease. Students will learn and apply anthropologic research methods to these problems.
SM 528. (ANTH623) Class, Inequality and Health: Ethnographic Perspectives. (B) Bourgois. This
seminar examines anthropological approaches to the concept of class and social inequality through a
close reading of a dozen ethnographies that deal with a broad definition of health, illness, and social
suffering. Readings span many of the theoretical, political, sub-disciplinary and area studies debates
in anthropolgy and the largers fields of poverty, social inequality, international development, violence
studies, science studies, governmentality, and social policy interventions over the past century.

Page 3 of 7

PUBLIC HEALTH STUDIES
(MD) {PUBH}
529. Topics in Family Planning. (A) Bennett, Schreiber.
This course will survey a range of key current and historic topics in family planning nationally and
internationally. Policy, epidemiology, clinical practice, advocacy, and service delivery topics will be
covered through presentations and conversations with leaders in the field of reproductive health. The
course will provide students with a broad general introduction to family planning which is appropriate
for those interested in either public health or clinical aspects of the field. For students who wish to
pursue a focused career in this area this course is a necessary introduction, while students who will
be working in related areas of public health will have a broad general understanding of family
planning. Students will particiapte through an interactive seminar style and will prepare an oral
presenation on a relevant topic of their choice.
530. (NURS677) Environmental Toxicology: Risk Assessment and Health Effects. (A) Liu.
Undergrads need Permission
This course presents general principals of toxicology and the disposition of toxins in the body. Case
studies of the effects of environmental and occupational toxins on individuals will be analyzed. This
course is designed for students who desire a strong foundation in toxicological concepts and
principals and provides an overview of major toxins in our environment and their association with
human health.
531. PUBLIC HEALTH NUTRITION.
SM 534. (CRIM415, CRIM615, HSOC471) Guns and Health. (A) Sorenson. The purpose of this
course is for students to gain an understanding of the role of guns in population health. We will
approach the topic with a healthy skepticism about the assumption and ideologies that dominate
formal and informal discourse about the topic. We will view guns as a consumer product (and examine
the life span of the product beginning with design and manufacture) and review the health outcomes
of gun use. In addition, we will address key aspects of the social context in which firearms exist and
within which firearm policy is made.
SM 539. (NURS823) DESIGNING INTERVENTIONS.
SM 535. (ANTH625) Urban Poverty and Violence. (M) Bourgois. This seminar examines
anthropological approaches to poverty and violence through a close reading of eight ethnographies.
Readings span many of the theoretical, political, sub-disciplinary and area studies debates in
anthropology and the larger fields of poverty, social inequality, internationaldevelopment, and violence
studies over the past century. My hope is to bring the subjects of urban poverty, violence, social
suffering and a critique of neoliberal governmentality into the center of the disciplines of anthropology
and public health speicifically, and the social sciences, humanities and medicine more broadly. In the
seminar we will be bringing students from anthropology, and other social science and humanities
disciplines in dialogue with students in public health, science studies, and clinical medicine.

Page 4 of 7

PUBLIC HEALTH STUDIES
(MD) {PUBH}
537. (HPR 610) Evidenced-Based Health Policy. (B) Gerdes, Zlotnik.Prerequisite(s): HPR 606 and
PUBH 505 or permission of instructor.
Achieving Evidence-Based Health Policy examines how research can influence health policy.
Individual sessions will be devoted to topics such as the NurseFamily Partnership program, health
insurance, smoking, and early childhood mental health. Sessions will examine how selection of
research methods may influence results; the dialectical relationship between research and policy; and
the role of various stakeholders (the media, foundations, government, advocates) in both research
and policy debates. Didactic topical resaerh presentations will be followed by interactive discussions
examining how research finds translates (or, as the case may be, do not translate) into policy. Guest
speakers will include research and policy experts from the public and private sectors. Prerequisites
are Fundamentals of Health Policy (offered through the Master's of Science in Health Policy); PUBH
505 Public Health Administration and Policy; or permission of instructor. Enrollment limited to 12.
538. (HPR 503) Qualitative Methods in Health. (L) Barg, Shea.
The purpose of this course is to expose students to a variety of qualitatie approaches/methodologies
that may be used in health services/policy research. In didactics we will discuss the pros and cons of
various methods, explaining how the method is actually implemented (with multiple experts presenting
their approaches), and pair the presentation with a broader discussion in which we compare and
contrast health oriented articles in which the method was used.
540. GO GLOBAL Course.
541. SOCIAL EPI Course.
545. Contemporary Issues in Maternal Child Health.
551. (NURS640, SWRK793) Global Health Policy and Delivery. (B) McLaughlin and Voet.
This participatory interdisciplinary seminar course examines contemporary issues in global health
policy and delivery. The overall organizing framework for the class is the social determinants of health.
The class will consider evidence that inequalities in education, income, and occupation influence
health status. Students will develop skills in policy analysis, policy brief development, and policy
impact monitoring. The public policy process will be explored using a variety of contemporary global
health case studies which focuson content areas such as maternal health, HIV policy, refugee health
an global healthcare delivery. Finally, we will examine the global health workforce and te impact of
widespread global migration of health professionals on receiving and sending countries.
553. SCIENCE & POLI OF FOOD.
558. HEALTH & DISEASE FOR PH.
575. (SWRK775) INTIMATE VIOLENCE.
580. IMPLEMENTING THE ACA.

Page 5 of 7

PUBLIC HEALTH STUDIES
(MD) {PUBH}
588. (NURS587) Advanced Leadership Skills in Community Health. (B) Margo; Klusaritz;
Lipman.Prerequisite(s): Enrollment in a Masters or Doctoral program. Undergraduates with permission
of the instructor
Grounded in a social justice perspective, this course aims to provide the student with a foundational
overview of the field of community health and leadership skills in public health advocacy. The course
encourages critical thinking about health outcomes framed by the broad context of the political and
social environment. This course analyzes the range of roles and functions carried out by leaders in
healthcare advocacy for marginalized communities; integrates knowledge of health policy and the key
influence of government and financing on health outcomes; explores community-based participatory
research and interventions as tools for change; and discuss ways to develop respectful partnerships
with community organizations. An assets-based approach that draws upon the strengths of
communities and their leaders provides a foundation for community-engagement skill building. The
course emphasizes the development of skills and techniques to lead effective, collaborative, healthfocused interventions for disenfranchised groups, including residents of urban neighborhoods.
589. PUB HEALTH & COG AGING.
SM 590. BGS Public Health Certificate Students' Seminar Series. (C) Nelson, Grisso. Corequisite
(s): For BGS Public Health Certificate studens only.
601. Cancer Epidemiology and Prevention. (A) McCarthy.Prerequisite(s): Enrollment limited to
master degree or doctoral degree students only; pubh502 or permission of the instructor required.
This course will provide an overview of current topics in cancer epidemiology and prevention. The
course will survey cancer incidence and mortality trends in the U.S. and abroad. Several major cancer
risk factors will be examined, such as tobacco exposure, diet and obesity, environmental exposures,
viruses, and genetics, along with primary prevention strategies. In addition, the course will review
important concepts in cancer screening such as sensitivity, specificity, and lead time bias. Current
issues in cancer screening will be discussed, along with controversies surrounding national cancer
screening guidelines. In addition, the course will explore racial/ ethnic and socioeconomic disparities
in cancer incidence and mortality. A main focus of the course will be how epidemiologic evidence is
used to identify causes of cancer and inform cancer prevention strategies on the individual and
population level.
597. History of Public Health. (A) Barnes. This masters-level seminar examines the health of human
populations and the science of improving it in historical perspective. Special attention is given to the
city of Philadelphia as a living laboratory of public health in the past and present. Lectures, readings
and discussions cover various societies' attempts to respond to and prevent disease since antiquity.
Case studies focus on the roots of contemporary public health knowledge and policy in the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries. Topics include responses to epidemics, the Bacteriological Revolution, racial
and economic disparities in health, the development of policy infrastructures, and global health.
Periodic field trips will be arranged to public health-related historical sites in Philadelphia and vicinity.
598. Immersion Experience in Global Public Health. (C) Nguyen. This independent educational
experience seeks to provide motivated students with the opportunity to expand their knowledge in
global health through focusedexperiential learning at international sites that provide direct public
health services. Such learning will allow students to gain real-world experience concerning the core
competencies of public health (health policy, behavior/ social sciences, environmental health,
epidemiology, or biostatistics).
599. Independent Study in Public Health. (C)
602. EPI METHODS DIS/PREV.
603. ADV RESEARCH METHODS.

Page 6 of 7

PUBLIC HEALTH STUDIES
(MD) {PUBH}
604. (SWRK781) QUAL RSRCH IN SOC SCI. (A)
605. EPI INFECTIOUS DISEASES.
701. INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE.
702. ORG & HLTH CARE MGMT.

Page 7 of 7

