ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 232. (COLL221, COML219) Perspectives in French Literature: The Individual and Society. (B)
This basic course in literature provides an overview of French literature and acquaints students with
major literary trends through the study of representative works from each period. Special emphasis is
placed on close reading of texts in order to familiarize students with major authors and their
characteristics and with methods of interpretation. Students are expected to take an active part in
class discussion in French. French 232 has as its theme the Individual and Society.
SM 233. Empire and De-Colonization. (C)
SM 308. TOPICS IN FRENCH CULTURE. (C)
How did France go from a nation with a monarch styled the Most Christian King
SM 310. LITERARY HISTORY. (M)
Please see the French department's website for the course description. https://www.sas.upenn.edu/
french/pc
L/R 386. (CINE386) PARIS IN FILM. (M)
See the Romance Languages Department's website at http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/roml for a current
description.
SM 537. (COML546, ENGL546, GSWS536) THE NOVEL AND MARRIAGE.
SM 560. (COML561, ENGL545) STUDIES IN THE 18TH C. (C)
Please check the French department's website for the course description. https://www.sas.upenn.edu/
french/pc
SM 105. SICILIAN LANGUAGE & CLTR. Prerequisite(s): There are no prerequisites for ITAL 105:
Sicilian Language and Culture.
Occupied over the centuries by the Greeks, Romans, Arabs, Normans, French, and Spaniards, Sicily
is a region of many histories and many traditions. Birthplace adn crossroad of cultures adn artistic
movements, the Sicilian land has shaped the imagination of its inhabitants and has never ceased to
fascinate its visitors. Its language and culture have also been exported abroad, through the many
Sicilians who left the island and settled all over the world. This course is an introduction to Sicilian
Language and Culture. We will study spoke Sicilian and cultural artifacts ranging from film to literature,
to music and food, in order to learn to recognize and understand the unique sounds and features of
"siciliano" and to converse in Sicilian with native speakers and with one another.
This course is delivered in an online format, with occasional face-to-face meetings. Class sessions
are offered through a course website and include live lectures and interactive discussions. Between
classes, the learning experience is extended through assignments, lectures and discussions.
SM 230. (HIST230) TOPICS IN EUROPEAN HIST. (C)
Please check the website for a current course description. http://www.sas.upenn.edu/italians/courses
318. (HIST318) ITAL HIST 1789-PRESENT. (M)
SM 384. (CINE387, COML384) HOLOCST ITAL LIT & FILM. (M)

Page 1 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 583. POST-HUMAN LANDSCAPES. (M)
SM 687. PASOLINI & CALVINO. (M)
SM 201. STUDY ABROAD.
SM 523. MODERN NOVEL. (M)
SM 543. (COML544, ENGL584, ENVS543, GRMN543) ENVIRONMENTAL HUMANITIES.

FRENCH (FREN)
Basic Language Courses
SM 110. Elementary French I. (C)
French 110 is the first semester of the elementary-level sequence designed to develop funcional
proficiency in the four skills and gain familiarity with French and Francophone culture. The primary
emphasis is on the development of the oral-aural skills, speaking and listening. Readings on topics in
French culture as well as frequent writing practice are also included in the course.
As in other French courses, class will be conducted entirely in French. You will be guided through a
variety of communicative activities in class which will expose you to a rich input of spoken French and
lead you from structured practice to free expression. You will be given frequent opportunity to practice
your newly acquired vocabulary and grammatical structures in small group and pair work which
simulate real-life situations. The course will introduce you to French and Francophone culture through
authentic materials including written documents, simple articles, songs, films, videos and taped
conversations between native speakers. Out-of-class homework will require practice with CDs as well
as regular writing practice. The course will also invite you to explore the Francophone world on the
Internet.
SM 112. Accelerated Elementary French. (A)
French 112 is an intensive elementary language course covering the equivalent of French 110 and
120 in one semester. Students must have a departmental permit to register. The course is normally
open only to students who have no previous knowledge of French, and who have already fulfilled the
language requirement in another language.
SM 120. Elementary French II. (C) Prerequisite(s): French 110.
French 120 is the second semester continuation of the elementary-level sequence designed to
develop functional proficiency in the four skills and gain familiarity with French and Francophone
culture. The primary emphasis is on the development of the oral-aural skills, speaking and listening.
Readings on topics in French culture as well as frequent writing practice are also included in the
course.
As in other French courses, class will be conducted entirely in French. You will be guided through a
variety of communicative activities in class which will expose you to rich input of spoken French and
lead you from structured practice to free expression. You will be given frequent opportunity to practice
your newly acquired vocabulary and grammatical structures in small group and pair work which
simulate real-life situations. The course will introduce you to French and Francophone culture through
authentic materials including written documents, simple articles, songs, films, videos, and taped
conversations between native speakers. Out-of-class homework will require practice with CDs as well
as regular writing practice. The course will also invite you to explore the Francophone world on the
Internet.

Page 2 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 121. Elementary French for "False Beginners". (A)
French 121 is an intensive one-semester language course for students who have had some French
before but who can benefit from a complete review of elementary French. Students with an SATII
score between 380-440 or a placement score between 18-29 should enroll in French 121. This course
will provide a re-introduction of the basic structures of French with intensive work on speaking and
listening designed to prepare students to take Intermediate French. Due to the nature of the course,
the first half will progress rapidly with much more difficult material being presented after the midterm
period.
As in other French courses, class will be conducted entirely in French. You will be guided through a
variety of communicative activities in class that will expose you to a rich input of spoken French and
lead you from structured practice to free expression. You will be given frequent opportunity to practice
your newly acquired vocabulary and grammatical structures in small group and pair work activities
which simulate real-life situations. The course will introduce you to French and Francophone culture
through authentic materials including written documents, simple articles, songs, films, videos, and
taped conversations between native speakers. Out-of-class homework will require frequent practice
with audio and video material, and will include daily written assignments. The course will also invite
you to explore the Francophone world on the Internet.
SM 130. Intermediate French I. (C) Prerequisite(s): Completion of French 120 or 121, or placement
into third-semester French.
French 130 is the first half of a two-semester intermediate sequence designed to help you attain a
level of proficiency that should allow you to function comfortably in a French-speaking environment.
You are expected to have already learned the most basic grammatical structures in elementary French
and you will review these on your own in the course workbook. This course will build on your existing
skills in French, increase your confidence and ability to read, write, speak and understand French, and
introduce you to more refined lexical items, more complex grammatical structures, and more
challenging cultural material.
As in other French courses at Penn, class will be conducted entirely in French. In addition to
structured oral practice, work in class will include frequent communicative activities such as role-plays,
problem-solving tasks, discussions, and debates, often carried out in pairs or small groups. Through
the study of authentic materials such as articles, poems, songs, films, videos, you will deepen your
knowledge of the French-speaking world. Daily homework will require listening practice with audio and
video material, in addition to regular written exercises in the workbook and frequent composition
practice.
Students who have completed French 120, or with an SATII score of 450-540 or a lacement score
between 30 and 35 should enroll in this course.
SM 134. Accelerated Intermediate French. (B)
An intensive two-credit course covering the first and second semester of the intermediate year. See
descriptions of French 130 and 140. Students must have a departmental permit to register. Also
offered in the summer Penn-in-Tours program in France.

Page 3 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 140. Intermediate French II. (C) Prerequisite(s): Completion of French 130 or placement into
fourth-semester French.
French 140 is the second half of a two-semester intermediate sequence designed to help you attain a
level of proficiency that should allow you to function comfortably in a French-speaking environment.
You are expected to have already learned the most basic grammatical structures in elementary French
and you will review these on your own in the course workbook. This course will build on your existing
skills in French, increase your confidence and ability to read, write, speak and understand French, and
introduce you to more refined lexical items, more complex grammatical structures, and more
challenging cultural material.
This course focuses on the culture of French-speaking countries beyond the borders of France.
Along with your classmates, you will explore the cities of Dakar, Fort-de-France and Marrakesh,
investigating the diversity of the francophone world through film, literature and music. As in other
French courses at Penn, class is conducted entirely in French. In addition to structured oral practice,
work in class will include frequent communicative activities such as problem-solving tasks,
discussions, and debates, often carried out in pairs or small groups. Daily homework will require
researching in the library and on the Internet, listening practice with video clips, in addition to regular
written exercises in the workbook.
SM 180. Advanced French in Residence. (E) Corequisite(s): Residence in Modern Language
House.
Open only to residents in La Maison Francaise. Participants earn 1/2 c.u. per semester.

Undergraduate-Level Courses
SM 214. Advanced French Composition and Conversation. (C) Prerequisite(s): French 202 and/or
212 recommended.
Entitled "Contemporary French Society through its Media," this course is intended to improve speaking
and writing skills by offering extensive practice in a variety of styles and forms. It will also help students
better understand contemporary French culture, thought and modes of expression. The content is
organized around current events and the themes of identity and art. Activities include the study,
analysis and emulation of model texts as well as discussion and debates about events and social
issues as covered by the French news media (television, print, Internet sources). Students will practice
oral skills in a variety of ways, including video blogs and group presentations on selected current
events. Written practice will comprise reflective journals, essays and collaborative work on Web
projects.
The goal of this course is to help students attain the Advanced level of proficiency in speaking and
writing (by ACTFL standards). The specific language functions we will work on are narration,
description, offering and soliciting advice and opinions, expressing feelings, critique and analysis,
argumentation.
(Recommended for students who are planning to study abroad in France)

Page 4 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 202. Advanced French. (C) Prerequisite(s): Open to students who have completed the language
requirement. Students who are continuing from French 134 or 140 should take French 202 before
moving on to more advanced French courses.
French 202 is a one-semester third-year level French course. It is designed to prepare students for
subsequent study in upper-level courses in French and francophone literature, linguistics, civilization,
cinema, etc. It is required for students who have completed 140 and recommended for those with an
equivalent level, wishing to continue in more advanced French courses or preparing for study abroad.
Exceptions can be made with permission of the undergraduate chair.
It is also an appropriate course for those students who have time for only one more French course
and wish to solidify their knowledge of the language by continuing to work on all four skills--speaking,
listening, reading and writing. Students' work will be evaluated both in terms of progress in language
skillsand of ability to handle and engage in the content areas.
This course does not include a systematic review of French grammar (that is done in FREN 212).
Nevertheless, through the diverse writing assessments (e.g., creative writing; essays), the various
textual and visual references (e.g., novels; articles; films; clips), the communicative approach, the
students will play an active role in their learning process and consequently will be led to consolidate
and deepen their grammatical competence.
The class studies two thematic units dealing with a wide variety of magazine articles, literary texts,
historical documents, movies, songs, etc. In the first dossier, students get a chance to expand their
knowledge of French history, with one major focus on World War II and the German occupation of
France. In the second dossier, students study contemporary France focusing on issues such as the
modern family, education, pop culture. While touching upon issues of identity in France, the class
engages the students into an intercultural dialogue which enables them to be more aware of the
differences and similarities between the two countries.
SM 211. French for the Professions I. (C) Prerequisite(s): Intermediate-high/advanced level of
French (French 202 highly recommended). No business background necessary.
This content-based language course, taught in French, introduces economic, business and
professional terminology through the study of the following topics: financial institutions (banking, stock
market and insurance); business practices (business letters and resumes); trade and advertising; the
internal structure and legal forms of French companies. The course also emphasizes verbal
communication through three components: 1) In-class activities such as problem-solving tasks,
discussions and debates. 2) The study of authentic materials such as newspapers and magazines'
articles, video clips, and radio shows. 3) A series of students' presentations.
Finally, in order to use and practice the new economic and business terminology studied in this
course, and to also further explore the structure, the management, and the operations of the French
companies, students will work in pairs on a research project about a major French company of their
choice.
One of the other goals of this course is to also prepare the students to take one of the exams
offered by the Paris Chamber of Commerce and Industry: the Diplome de Francais Professionnel,
Affaires, C1. This exam will be held on campus in April.
SM 212. Advanced French Grammar and Composition. (C)
Intensive review of grammar integrated into writing practice. A good knowledge of basic French
grammar is a prerequisite (French 202 or equivalent is recommended). Conducted entirely in French,
the course will study selected grammatical difficulties of the French verbal and nominal systems
including colloquial usage. Frequent oral and written assignments with opportunity for rewrites.
Articles from French newspapers and magazines, literary excerpts, and a novel or short stories will
be used as supplementary materials in order to prepare students to take content courses in French in
disciplines other than French.

Page 5 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 217. French Phonetics. (C)
This course is designed to provide students with a solid foundation in French phonetics and
phonology. Part of the course will be devoted to learning how to produce discourse with native-like
pronunciation and intonation. The course will also focus on improving aural comprehension by
examining stylistic and regional differences in spoken French.
SM 226. French History and Culture until 1789. (A) History & Tradition Sector. All
classes.Prerequisite(s): Two advanced courses taken at Penn or equivalent.
An introduction to the social, political and historical institutions of France from the earliest times until
the Revolution of 1789. Required for majors in French and also of particular interest to majors in
history, international relations, Wharton students, etc.
This course will be taught in French.
L/R 230. (CINE245) Masterpieces of French Cinema. (A)
This course will introduce students to key films of the French film canon, selected over a period
ranging from the origins of French cinema to the present. Students will also be introduced to the key
critical concepts (such as the notion of the "auteur" film genre) informing the discussion of films in
France. The films will be studied in both a historical and theoretical context, related to their period
styles (e.g. "le realisme poetique," "la Nouvelle Vague," etc.), their "auteurs," the nature of the French
star system, the role of the other arts, as well to the critical debates they have sparked among critics
and historians. Students will acquire the analytical tools in French to discuss films as artistic and as
cultural texts.
Please note: This course follows a Lecture/Recitation format. The Lecture (FREN 230-401/CINE
245-401) is taught in English. For French credit: please register for both FREN 230-401 (lecture) and
FREN 230-402 (recitation); the FREN 230-402 recitation is conducted in French. For Cinema Studies
credit: please register for CINE 245-401 (lecture) and CINE 245-403 (recitation); both are taught in
English.
SM 227. French History and Culture 1789-1945. (B) Prerequisite(s): Two advanced courses taken at
Penn or equivalent.
French cultural and social history from the Revolution of 1789 to the liberation of Paris in 1944.
Readings in primary and secondary sources, including political documents, literary excerpts and
contemporary articles.
Required for majors, also of particular interest to majors in History, International Relations, Wharton
students, etc. The course is taught in French.
SM 228. Contemporary France. (C)
This course focuses on the major cultural and political events that have transformed French society
from 1945 to the first decades of the new millennium. Using a wide range of print, visual, and online
media, this class allows students to examine and research contemporary France by way of the main
issues, movements and debates that have marked the last decades. Among these are: France's
postwar International relations; Memory and national identity; Migration, immigration and
multiculturalism; Religion and/in the Republic; Civil society; Intellectual movements and cultural
productions.

Page 6 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 229. (LING229) French in the World. (C)
Le Francais dans le monde/French in the World provides a survey of the sociolinguistics of the French
language in the contemporary world in order to elucidate how societal changes influence the manner
and the contexts in which the French language is spoken. Case studies focus on various parts of the
Francophone world, including Africa, Southeast Asia, and the Americas. The course considers
questions such as the following: What effect does contact with other languages have on the way
French is spoken? Which variety (or varieties) of French represents "good" or standard language use?
How do political forces and movements affect the evolution of French? What is the present and future
role of the French language in the face of globalization? How are language attitudes similar and
different among French-speaking and English-speaking regions of the world? In what ways does the
language we speak and the way we speak it shape our identities? Readings and class discussions are
in French.
SM 231. (COLL221, COML218) Perspectives in French Literature. (A) Arts & Letters Sector. All
Classes.
This basic course in literature provides an overview of French literature and acquaints students with
major literary trends through the study of representative works from each period. Students are
expected to take an active part in class discussion in French. French 231 has as its theme the
presentation of love and passion in French literature.
This course was previously offered as French 221.
SM 290. The French Short Story. (M)
SM 301. (CINE301, GSWS301) French Identity in the Twentieth Century. (C)
Topics vary. Please see the French Department's website for a description of the current offerings:
https://www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 311. (COML309) French Thought After 1968. (C) Yue Zhuo.
SM 313. French for the Professions II. (B) Prerequisite(s): An intermediate high to advanced level of
French. French for the Professions I (211) highly advisable. No business background necessary.
The course, conducted entirely in French, emphasizes verbal communication in business professional
situations through three components. First, a series of student's presentations, in-class activities
(using newspapers' articles, technical readings, radio shows and films), and debates on the following
topics (list not exhaustive) related to France's economy and society: The role of the State in France's
economy; the French fiscal system; Labor (impact of the 35-hour work week, "conges," women in the
workplace, etc.); Regions of France (production); major French industries/companies/brands; France's
major imports/exports; "Green business"; Business of pop culture.
Second, as effective communication is based not only on linguistic proficiency but also on cultural
proficiency, cultural differences mostly between Americans and French will be explored.
Finally, throughout the semester, students will work in groups on the creation of their own business,
association, or other organization and will be invited to present their project to the class at the end of
the semester. On completion of the course, students will also have the opportunity to take the Diplome
de Francais Professionnel-DFP Affaires (C1) administered by the Paris Chamber of Commerce and
Industry.

Page 7 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 322. France and the European Union. (B)
This course aims to provide an understanding of the European Union as a complex entity: its history,
institutions, challenges and future. After reviewing the history of European integration and describing
the Community's institutions, common programs and market, we will consider a wide variety of themes
important to Europe: economics, business, science, education, immigration, the environment, social
issues, national and European identity, a Federal Europe vs. a Europe of nations, European social/
cultural models vs. American liberalism, relations between the EU and the rest of the world. Students
will be responsible for pursuing substantive research on these and other topics and participating
actively in debates. We will also follow and discuss current events that are pertinent to the EU in
general and to France in particular.
This class will be conducted entirely in French and is designed to improve cross-cultural
understanding and communicative skills in the presentational, interpretive and interpersonal modes.
SM 325. Advanced French Translation. (B) Prerequisite(s): French 212 or equivalent recommended.
This course provides an introduction to the theory and practice of translation and is designed to help
foster a critical understanding of differences between French and English syntactical and lexical
patterns. It will introduce students to theoretical concepts and problems of translation, with the ultimate
goal being to improve their ability to communicate in more authentic-sounding French. Students will
have the opportunity to practice translation individually and to work with their peers on a variety of
projects (advertising, journalistic and literary texts, movie and broadcast news subtitling) and to
engage in critique and discussion of others' translations. This course will help students refine their
language skills and navigate more proficiently between these cultures and language systems.
(Designed for students who already have a solid foundation in French and English grammar)
SM 330. Medieval Literature. (M)
An introductory course to the literature of the French Middle Ages. French literature began in the 11th
and 12th centuries. This course examines the extraordinary period during which the French literary
tradition was first established by looking at a number of key generative themes: Identity, Heroism,
Love, Gender. All readings and discussions in French.
SM 340. French Renaissance Literature. (C)
This course introduces a diverse and fascinating era, which marks the beginning of the early modern
period. It examines the political, historical, and social context of France and investigates how
contemporary writers and poets translated the discoveries of Humanism into their works. Authors to be
studied include the poets Clement Marot, Maurice Sceve, Louise Labe, Pernette Du Guillet, Ronsard
and Du Bellay. In addition, a number of stories from Marguerite de Navarre's rewriting of the
"Decameron" (L'Heptameron), as well as Rabelais's comic work "Pantagruel" and some essays of
Montaigne will be analyzed.
SM 350. 17th Century French Literature. (C)
We will read a number of the masterpieces of the Golden Age of French literature, including works by
Moliere, Racine, Lafayette, and La Fontaine. We will place special emphasis on the social and political
context of their creation (the court of Versailles and the most brilliant years of Louis XIV's reign).
SM 360. (GSWS360, HIST211) French Literature of the 18th Century. (M)
Topics vary. For current course description, please see French Dpartment's webpage: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc

Page 8 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 370. French Literature of the 19th Century. (M)
Topic changes each semester.
SM 379. Short Narratives in Fantastic Literature. (M)
This course will explore fantasy and the fantastic in short tales of 19th and 20th century French
literature. A variety of approaches - thematic, psychoanalytic, cultural, narratological - will be used in
an attempt to define the subversive force of a literary mode that contributes to shedding light on the
dark side of the human psyche by interrogating the "real," making visible the unseen and articulating
the unsaid. Such broad categories as distortions of space and time, reason and madness, order and
disorder, sexual transgressions, self and other, will be considered.
Readings usually include "recits fantastiques" by Merimee, Gautier, Nerval, Villiers de l'Isle-Adam,
Maupassant, Breton, Jean Ray, Mandiargues and others.
SM 380. (COML381) Literature of the Twentieth Century. (M)
This course, the theme of which changes from semester to semester, provides an introduction to
important trends in twentieth-century literature. Please check the French Department's website for the
course description. https://www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
L/R 382. (CINE382, COML372) Horror Cinema. (C) Met. The course will be taught in English. French
credit by arrangement with Instructor.
The purpose of this course is to provide an introduction to the history and main themes of the
supernatural/horror film from a comparative perspective. Films considered will include: the German
expressionists masterworks of the silent era, the Universal classics of the 30's and the low-budget
horror films produced by Val Lewton in the 40's for RKO in the US, the 1950's color films of sex and
violence by Hammer studios in England, Italian Gothic horror or giallo (Mario Brava) and French lyrical
macabre (Georges Franju) in the 60's, and on to contemporary gore. In an effort to better understand
how the horror film makes us confront out worst fears and our most secret desires alike, we will look at
the genre's main iconic figures (Frankenstein, Dracula, Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, etc.) as well as issues
of ethics, gender, sexuality, violence, spectatorship through a variety of critical lenses (psychoanalysis,
socio-historial and cultural context, aesthetics,...).
SM 384. The French Novel of the Twentieth Century. (M)
Please check the French department's website for the course description: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/
french/pc
SM 391. Litterature Quebecoise. (M)
SM 385. Modern French Theater. (M)
A study of major movements and major dramatists from Giraudoux and Sartre to the theater of the
absurd and its aftermath.
SM 389. France and Its Others. (M)
A historical appreciation of the impact of the exploration, colonization, and immigration of other
peoples on French national consciousness, from the 16th century to the present. Emphasis is on the
role of the Other in fostering critiques of French culture and society. Readings include travel literature,
anthropological treatises, novels, and historical documents. Oral presentations and several short
papers are included in the course.

Page 9 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 390. (AFRC391, AFST390) Survey Francophone Literature. (M)
A brief introduction about the stages of French colonialism and its continuing political and cultural
consequences, and then reading in various major works -- novels, plays, poems -- in French by
authors from Quebec, the Caribbean, Africa (including the Maghreb), etc. Of interest to majors in
International Relations, Anthropology and African Studies as well as majors in French. Taught in
French.
SM 393. (COML393) Africa & African Diaspora. (M) Taught in English
This course will take the form of an introductory seminar designed to provide undergraduate students
an overview of significant themes and issues focusing on the historical, political and cultural
relationships between Africans and their descendants abroad. It will encompass: a review of different
historical periods and geographical locations, from Ancient Egypt to modern American, Caribbean and
African states; a critical evaluation of social movements and theories that have developed in the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries among scholars of different origins in their attempt to reconstruct
Africa as a center and the Diaspora as a specific cultural space; and, an exploration of representations
of Africa and the Diaspora in canonical literary works and other forms of fiction like the visual arts.
SM 394. (AFRC293) Topics in Caribbean Literature. (M)
This course will introduce students to the literature of the French-speaking Caribbean (West Indian
Literature) in the context of literary history and modern culture. Select works will be examined
individually and in relation to each other. We will explore the themes that link these works,
comparisons and contrasts in literary techniques, and approaches to language.
SM 395. (CINE395) Topics in African Literature. (M)
Topics vary from semester to semester.
398. Honors Thesis. (C)
399. Independent Study. (C)
See instructor for permission.

Graduate Level Courses
SM 500. Proseminar. (M)
This course will provide a forum for collective preparation for the Master's exam.
SM 512. History of Literary Theory. (M)
An exploration of literary theory centering on a few concepts (tradition, textuality, interpretation,
ideology, authority) and problematizing the ways in which we read literature.
SM 550. (COML549) Etudes sur le XVII siecle. (M)
The specific topics of the seminar vary from semester to semester, depending on the instructor and
his/her choice. Among the topics previously covered, and likely to be offered again, are the following:
The Theatre of Jean Racine, Fiction of Mme de Lafayette, The Moralists (La Bruyere, La
Rochefoucauld, Perrault ), Realistic Novels (Sorel's Francion, Scarron's Le Roman Comique,
Furetiere's Le Roman Bourgeois). Students Give oral and written reports, and write a term paper.

Page 10 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 573. (ARTH573, CINE515, COML570, ENGL573, GRMN573) Topics in Criticism and Theory.
(M)
SM 580. Studies in 20th-Century French Literature. (M)
SM 582. (COML589) Fantastic Literature 19th/20th Centuries. (M)
This course will explore fantasy and the fantastic in short tales of 19th- and 20th-century French
literature. A variety of approaches -- thematic, psychoanalytic, cultural, narratological -- will be used in
an attempt to test their viability and define the subversive force of a literary mode that contributes to
shedding light on the dark side of the human psyche by interrogating the "real," making visible the
unseen and articulating the unsaid. Such broad categories as distortions of space and time, reason
and madness, order and disorder, sexual transgressions, self and other will be considered. Readings
will include "recits fantastiques" by Merimee, Gautier, Nerval, Maupassant, Breton, Pieyre de
Mandiargues, Jean Ray and others.
SM 590. (AFRC591, AFST560, COML596) Introduction to Francophone Studies. (M)
An introduction to major literary movements and authors from five areas of Francophonie: the
Maghreb, West Africa, Central Africa, the Caribbean and Quebec.
SM 591. Francophone Cultures. (M)
SM 593. (AFRC593, AFST593) Studies in Francophone Literature. (M)
Topics will vary. Seminar will focus on one area, author, or "problematique" in Francophone studies.
Examples of an area-focused seminar: The African Contemporary novel or Francophone Caribbean
writers. Example of a single-author Seminar: The Poetry and Drama of Aime Cesaire: Examples of a
thematic approach: writing and national identity, postcolonial conditions, autobiography. Please see the
department's website for the current course description: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 600. Old French. (B)
A systematic study of the structure of Old French including phonology, morphology, syntax, and
lexicon as well as intensive practice in reading Old French texts with an emphasis on 12th- and 13thcentury texts. By the end of the semester, students should be able to read works in Old French with
the aid of a dictionary. Attention will be paid to the chronological differences between earlier and later
Old French as well as to the major dialectal differences. Students will also be familiarized with the
major research tools, dictionaries and grammars for working on Old French.
SM 595. Travel Literature. (M)
Within the context of the ill-defined, heterogeneous genre of the travelogue and of today's age of
globalization, CNN and the Internet, this seminar will examine the poetics of travel writing based
largely albeit not exclusively on travel notebooks, or journaux/carnets de voyage, spanning the XXth
century from beginning to end. One of the principal specificities of the texts studied is that they all
evince to a lesser or greater degree a paradoxical resistance both to the very idea of travel(ing) as
such and to the mimetic rhetoric of traditional travel narratives. We will therefore look at how modern or
postmodern texts question, revisit, subvert or reject such key notions of travel literature as exoticism,
nostalgia, exile, nomadism, otherness or foreignness vs. selfhood, ethnology and autobiography, etc.
Authors considered will include Segalen, Morand, Michaux, Leiris, Levi-Strauss, Butor, Le Clezio,
Baudrillard, Bouvier, Jouanard, Leuwers.

Page 11 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 601. (ITAL690, ROML690, SPAN609) Language Teaching/Learning. (M)
Please check the French department's website for the course description. https://www.sas.upenn.edu/
french/pc
SM 602. Theory and Criticism. (M)
Please see the department's website for current course description: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/
french/pc
SM 603. Poetique Du Recit.
SM 606. Postcolonial Theory. (M)
SM 610. Intro to French Cinema. (M)
SM 611. (CINE611) Topics in Cinema Studies. (M)
SM 612. Film Noir. (M)
Topics vary. Please see the French department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 619. (COML619) Poetique du Recit. (M)
SM 620. Global Perspectives in French Studies. (A)
Topics vary. Please see the department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 630. (COML630, ITAL630) Introduction to Medieval French Literature. (M)
Topics vary. Previous topics include The Grail and the Rose, Literary Genres and Transformations, and
Readings in Old French Texts. Please see French department's website for current course description:
https://www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 631. Epic and Romance. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see French department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 634. Le Roman de la Rose. (M)
SM 635. (COML714) Late Medieval Literature. (M)
One possible topic is "History and Allegory: Problems of Representation." Considers several privileged
cases of the relationship between the contemporary historical subject (dangerous, unstable) and the
allegorical mode of representation (literary-philosophical, distancing, cerebrally interpretive). Texts to
be studied include the "Roman de Fauvel" (and the spectacular corruption of Philippe le Bel's court in
early 13th-century Paris); Christine de Pizan's "Epistre d'Othea" and "Jehanne d'Arc" (and
mythographic-allegorical treatments of the "crisis of the Hundred Years War" in the late 14th and early
15th centuries); as well as Froissart and de la Sale. Please see French department's website for
current course description: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc

Page 12 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 638. (COML638, MUSC710) Topics: Medieval Culture. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 640. (COML643, GSWS640) Studies in the Renaissance. (M)
Topics vary. Previous topics have included Rabelais and M. de Navarre, Montaigne, and Renaissance
and Counter-Renaissance. Please see French department's website for current course description:
https://www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 641. French Poetry of the 16th Century. (M)
SM 650. (COML651, GRMN651, HIST651) Studies in the 17th Century. (M)
Topics of discussion will vary from semester to semester. One possible topic is "The Royal Machine:
Louis XIV and the Versailles Era." We will examine certain key texts of what is known as the Golden
Age of French literature in tandem with a number of recent theoretical texts that could be described as
historical. Our goal will be to explore the basis of "the new historicism," a term that is designed to
cover a variety of critical systems that try to account for the historical specificity and referentiality of
literary texts. Please see department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 652. (COML652, GSWS652) Early Modern French Women Writers. (M)
Topics of will vary. Please see department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 660. (COML620, ENGL748, GSWS748) Studies in the Eighteenth Century. (M)
Topics of discussion will vary from semester to semester. One possible topic is "Masterpieces of the
Enlightenment." We will read the most influential texts of the Enlightenment, texts that shaped the
social and political consciousness characteristic of the Enlightenment--for example, the meditations on
freedom of religious expression that Voltaire contributed to "affaires" such as the "affaire Calas." We
will also discuss different monuments of the spirit of the age--its corruption (Les Liaisons
dangereuses), its libertine excesses and philosophy (La Philosophie dans le boudoir). We will define
the specificity of 18th-century prose (fiction), guided by a central question: What was the
Enlightenment? Please see department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 654. (COML658, ENGL730, GRMN665, MUSC654) Early Modern Seminar. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc

Page 13 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 662. (COML661) The Epistolary Novel. (M)
From the Regency to the Revolution, the French 18th century was obsessed with the present moment.
In literature, this obsession manifests itself most clearly in the epistolary novel, which became the
privileged form of expression chosen by all the major authors of the age. Because of the rise of
epistolarity, the art of "writing to the moment," in Richardson's memorable formulation, must be seen
as one of the Enlightenment's principal voices. And, for the first time, the letter became a highly valued
means of communication, in both the private and the public domains.
We will read most of the major epistolary novels beginning with the genre's first classic, "Lettres
portugaises," and ending with its masterpiece, "Liaisons dangereuses." We will consider some real
correspondences--for example, Sevigne's and Diderot's--to see how the urge to turn them into novels
proved irresistible, to editors and authors alike. Finally, we will read several examples of what was
known as the "public" letter, philosophical texts that used the epistolary form (for example, Diderot's
"Lettre sur les aveugles"), to see how the techniques of epistolarity survived the transition into the
realm of the polemical.
SM 670. (COML669) 19th-Century Studies. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 671. 19th-Century French Poetry. (M)
Topics of discussion will vary from semester to semester. A representative description follows:
Rimbaud, Lautreamont, Mallarme. One half of the course will be devoted to Rimbaud and
Lautreamont, the second half to Mallarme. We will attempt to focus on such points as the revolution in
poetic language, the textual body, the (en)gendering of the subject. Students will be required to read
critical and theoretical writings on these questions, and discuss them in class presentations. Please
see department's website for current course description: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 672. Major Authors 19th Century. (M)
SM 673. 19th Century Literature and the Arts. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 674. The 19th-Century French Novel. (M)
The development of the French novel in the 19th-century: structure and theory, ideological and
historical questions. Focus may vary.
SM 675. Topics in 19th Century Literature. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 676. Science and Literature. (M)
SM 680. (CINE680, COML595) Studies in the 20th Century. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see the French department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc

Page 14 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 681. Studies in Modern French Poetry. (M)
How does one approach the modern poetic text which ever since the Mallarmean "crise de vers"
appears to have cut loose from all referential anchoring and traditional markers (prosody, versification,
etc.)? This course will present an array of possible methodological answers to this question, focusing
on poetic forms and manifestations of brevity and fragmentation. In addition to being submitted to
precise formal and textual inquiries, each text or work will be the point of departure for the analysis of
a specific theoretical issue and/or an original practice - e.g., genetic criticism, translation theory, the
poetic "diary", aphoristic modes of writing, quoting and rewriting practices, etc. Texts by key modern
poets (Ponge, Chazal, Du Bouchet, Jourdan, Jabes, Michaux).
SM 684. The French Novel of the 20th Century. (M)
Topics vary. Please check the French department's website for the course description. https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 685. Studies in 20th Century French Theater. (M)
SM 686. Major Authors 20th/21st Century. (M)
SM 687. Studies in 21st Century. (M)
Topics will vary.
SM 688. Contemporary French Culture. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 690. Francophone Studies. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 695. Postcolonial France. (M)
SM 692. Caribbean Studies. (M)
SM 693. (AFRC693, AFST693) Topics in Postcolonial Studies. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see French department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 694. Francophone Africa. (M)
SM 696. (AFST696, COML696) POSTCO THEORY FRANCOPHON. (C)
SM 700. (AFRC708, COML708) Topics in Interdisciplinary Studies.
Topics will vary. Please see French department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc

Page 15 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 701. Topics in Cultural Studies. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see French department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 702. Topics in Popular Culture. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see French department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 703. Representing Paris. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
SM 704. The French Atlantic. (M)
Topics will vary. Please see department's website for current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/french/pc
851. Dissertation Proposal. (M)
999. Independent Study. (C)
Designed to allow students to pursue a particular research topic under the close supervision of an
instructor.

ITALIAN (ITAL)
Basic Language Courses
SM 110. Elementary Italian I. (C)
A first semester elementary language course for students who have never studied Italian or who have
had very little exposure to the language. Students who have previously studied Italian are required to
take the placement test. Class work emphasizes the development of the oral-aural skills, speaking and
listening. Readings on topics in Italian culture as well as frequent writing practice are also included.
Out-of-class homework requires work with the Internet, audio and video materials.
SM 112. Accelerated Elementary Italian. (C) Prerequisite(s): Proficiency in another foreign language.
An intensive two-credit course covering the first and second semester of the elementary year for
students who have never studied Italian before but have already fulfilled the language requirement in
another modern language, preferably a romance language. Students who have fulfilled the language
requirement in a language other than a romance language will be considered on an individual basis.
All students must have departmental permission to register.
Class work emphasizes the development of the oral-aural skills, speaking and and listening.
Readings on topics in Italian culture as well as frequent writing practice are also included. Out-of-class
homework requires work with the Internet, audio and video materials.

Page 16 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 120. Elementary Italian II. (C) Prerequisite(s): Completion of Italian 110 or placement into 2nd
semester Italian.
This course is the continuation of the elementary level sequence designed to develop functional
competence in the four skills. Class work emphasizes the further development of the oral-aural skills,
speaking and listening. Readings on topics in Italian culture as well as frequent writing practice are
also included. Out-of-class homework requires work with the Internet, audio and video materials.
SM 130. Intermediate Italian I. (C) Prerequisite(s): Completion of Italian 120 at Penn or a placement
score between 450 and 540 on the Achievement Exam (SAT II).
Italian 130 is the first half of a two-semester intermediate sequence designed to help you attain a level
of proficiency that will allow you to function comfortably in an Italian-speaking environment. The course
will build on your existing skills in Italian, increase your confidence and your ability to read, write,
speak and understand the language, and introduce you to more refined lexical items, more complex
grammatical structures, and more challenging cultural material. You are expected to have already
learned the most basic grammatical structures in elementary Italian and to review these. The course
textbook, together with all supplementary materials, will allow you to explore culturally relevant topics
and to develop cross-cultural skills through the exploration of similarities and differences between your
native culture and the Italian world.
SM 134. Accelerated Intermediate Italian. (C) Prerequisite(s): Italian 112 or departmental permit;
proficiency in another foreign language.
Italian 134 is the intensive and accelerated course that combines in one semester the intermediate
sequence (130 and 140). It will build on your existing skills in Italian, increase your confidence and
your ability to read, write, speak and understand the language, and introduce you to more refined
lexical items, more complex grammatical structures, and more challenging cultural material. You are
expected to have already learned the most basic grammatical structures in elementary Italian and to
review these on your own. The course will allow you to explore culturally relevant topics and to develop
cross-cultural skills through the exploration of similarities and differences between your native culture
and the Italian world.
SM 685. (ARTH786, CINE685) 20th Century Italian Culture. (M)

Undergraduate-Level Courses
SM 140. Intermediate Italian II. (C) Prerequisite(s): Completion of Italian 130 at Penn or placement
into Italian 140.
Italian 140 is the second half of a two-semester intermediate sequence designed to help you attain a
level of proficiency that will allow you to function comfortably in an Italian-speaking environment. The
course will build on your existing skills in Italian, increase your confidence and your ability to read,
write, speak and understand the language, and introduce you to more refined lexical items, more
complex grammatical structures, and more challenging cultural material. You are expected to have
already learned the most basic grammatical structures in elementary Italian and to review these on
your own. The course will allow you to explore culturally relevant topics and to develop cross-cultural
skills through the exploration of analogies and differences between your native culture and the Italian
world. The course will move beyond stereotypical presentations of Italy and its people to concentrate
on specific social issues together with cultural topics.
SM 180. Italian Conversation in Residence. (E) Must be resident of the Modern Language House
SM 682. (CINE682) Topics: Literature and Film. (M)

Page 17 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 080. (COML080) Introduction to Italian Cinema. (C) Arts & Letters Sector. All Classes.
Italian national cinema from the Golden Age of silent film and classics of Neorealism to present,
covering work of a dozen major directors. Films discussed in context of history from the Unification,
national vs. regional identity, gender roles, contemporary politics. Readings in Italian history, Italian film
history, and theory of cinema. Taught in English.
SM 100. (CINE014, COML107, GSWS100) Topics: Freshman Seminar. (C)
Topics vary. See the Department's website at https://www.sas.upenn.edu/italians/courses for a
description of current offerings.
SM 200. (HIST230) Medieval Culture. (M)
Topics will vary.
SM 201. Advanced Italian I. (C) Prerequisite(s): Open to students who have satisfied the language
requirement in Italian. ITAL 201 or equivalent is a prerequisite for all other courses taught in Italian at
the 200/300 level.
Italian 201 will focus on a recent movie by Italian director Tullio Giordana, La meglio gioventu (2002),
which will be used as a point of departure to explore contemporary Italian culture following its
development since the 1960s. Another recent movie, Mio fratello e figlio unico (2007), will be viewed
and analyzed at the conclusion of the course as compared to La meglio gioventu. Pertinent literary
texts, newspaper articles, as well as material in other media will complement the analysis of the film
and allow an in-depth discussion of the most important topics. The cultural material explored in the
course will be also used as a basis for a review of the most difficult grammar structures, with an
emphasis on those necessary to express opinion and formulate hypothesis.
Audiovisual materials and readings have been carefully chosen to develop student's comprehension
and production in Italian, and to enable them to function in an academic setting in which competence
at the advanced level is required. Class work will center primarily on conversation to improve students'
fluency, vocabulary, and accuracy in speaking in the formal register. Homework will consist primarily,
but not exclusively, of paragraph- length blog entries and 1.5-2 page compositions to improve students'
ability to express themselves correctly and elegantly in written Italian. Additionally, students will be
required to prepare two five 5 minute in-class or video presentation on one or parts of an assigned
sequence, and on a social or cultural issue. In place of a final exam, students will write a final essay of
5-6 pages comparing La meglio gioventu to another recent Italian movie, Mio fratello e figlio unico, that
will be introduced in class during the last week of the semester.

Page 18 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 202. Advanced Italian II. (C) Prerequisite(s): Open to students who have completed ITAL 201.
Please see the Undergraduate Chair if you have any questions.
In Italian 202 (formerly 205), students will perfect their communication skills to function in the formal
register appropriate for an academic setting, while continuing to explore significant aspects of
contemporary Italian culture and history. Students will take futher steps towards being able to
understand in depth and to contextualize authentic Italian documents. Texts like films, songs, and a
variety of readings, will be used as windows on particular historical periods, cultural movements,
political issues, and social customs. They will serve as a tool to investigate the many facets of Italian
identity and, at the same time, as a way to prepare those students who will continue their study of
Italian literature and culture in higher-level courses.
Students are expected to participate willingly in conversations and all other class activities in order
to perfect their oral and written ability to narrate, express opinion, hypothesize, and discuss a variety of
topics quite accurately, using rich, appropriate vocabulary and grammar, and organizing paragraphs
into well structured discourses, be they oral presentations, weekly compositions (2-2.5 pages) or the
final essay (6-7 pages). To reach these goals, speaking, listening, reading and writing activities -- role
plays, discussions, oral presentations, journals, grammar reviews -- will be based on audio-visual
material and written texts provided by the instructor, and purchased and/or proposed by the students
themselves, based on their independent explorations and research.
SM 213. (CINE213) Contemporary Italy Through Film. (M) Arts & Letters Sector. All Classes.
Topics vary. See the Department's website for a description of the current offering at http://
www.sas.upenn.edu/italians/courses
SM 203. (COLL228, COML203) Masterpieces-Italian Literature. (C) Prerequisite(s): Open to
students who have completed ITAL 201 or equivalent.
This course surveys the history of Italian literature through its major masterpieces. Beginning with
Dante's Divine Comedy, Petrarca's love poems, and Boccaccio's Decameron, we will follow the
development of Italian literary tradition through the Renaissance (Machiavelli's political theory and
Ariosto's epic poem), and then through Romanticism (Leopardi's lyric poetry and Manzoni's historical
novel), up to the 20th century (from D'annunzio's sensual poetry to Calvino's post-modern short
stories). The course will provide students with the tools needed for analyzing the texts in terms of both
form and content, and for framing them in their historical, cultural, and socio-political context. Classes
and readings will be in Italian. ITAL 203 is mandatory for Minors in Italian Literature and Majors in
Italian Literature. If necessary, ITAL 201 can be taken at the same time as ITAL 203.
SM 204. (CINE206, COML206) Italian History on Screen: How Movies Tell the Story of Italy. (C)
Arts & Letters Sector. All Classes.
How has our image of Italy arrived to us? Where does the story begin and who has recounted,
rewritten, and rearranged it over the centuries? In this course, we will study Italy's rich and complex
past and present. We will carefully read literary and historical texts and thoughtfully watch films in
order to attain an understanding of Italy that is as varied and multifacted as the country itself. Group
work, discussions and readings will allow us to examine the problems and trends in the political,
cultural and social history from ancient Rome to today. We will focus on: the Roman Empire, Middle
Ages, Renaissance, Unification, Turn of the Century, Fascist era, World War II, post-war and
contemporary Italy.

Page 19 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 208. Business Italian I. (M) Prerequisite(s): Open to students who have completed ITAL 201 or
equivalent.
The course is conducted entirely in Italian and should be taken after completion of Italian 201 or
equivalent. It is designed to enable students to acquire language proficiency in the current Italian
business and labor world. Business terminology will be used in specific business situations such as
banking, trade, communications, etc. The course will examine Italian business practices, cultural
differences such as the attitude towards money, work, leisure and consumerism through websites,
newspaper and magazine articles and video clips. Students will learn to read business publications,
write and compose business texts, and participate in business-related conversations. Additionally,
guest lecturers from the local business world with ties to Italy will provide students with information
about internship and job opportunities and the knowledge necessary to navigate international and
Italian commercial routes.
SM 215. Interdisciplinary Approaches to Literature and Cinema. (C) Prerequisite(s): Open to
students who have completed ITAL 201 or equivalent.
Topics vary. See the Department's website at for a description of current offerings at http://
www.sas.upenn.edu/italians/courses
SM 216. Introduction to Literature II.. (C)
Focusing on the moon and its nocturnal effects as represented in film, opera, literature and art, this
course offers a survey of the last four centuries of Italian literature and culture. Man stepped on the
Moon on July 20, 1969 and since then Armstrong's footprint has remained in the lunar dust. We know
now that the Moon is a vast and deserted landscape where no life is possible. Now that we have
succeeded in contaminating the Moon with our presence, is Science Fiction the only possible
discourse on the Moon other than the one carried on by astronomers? What is left of the romantic
lunar dream? Can those human footprints destroy the image of the kissing faces that romantic
painters saw on the lunar disk? Can we still fly on the Moon looking for Orlando's common sense? or
imagine our satellite populated by lurid, gesticulating goblins who cause the monstrous
metamorphosis of werewolves? Have we finally succeeded in realizing the futuristic scream by
Marinetti "Let's kill the moonlight?" These are some of the questions this course will address and
discuss by reading or viewing works (in their entirety or in excerpts) by the following authors: Luciano,
Ariosto, Tasso, Galileo, Goldoni, Pindemonte, Parini, Leopardi, Bellini, Donizzetti, Salgari, Capuana,
D'Annunzio Pirandello, Fellini, Calvino.
SM 220. Cultura E Letteratura. (C)
Taught in Venice.
SM 222. Topics in Italian Cinema. (C)
Topics vary. See the Romance Languages Department's website at http://www.sas.upenn.edu/italians/
courses for a description of current offerings.
SM 226. SA: Culture and Literature. (C)
Topics vary.

Page 20 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 232. (COML234) The World of Dante. (M)
Dante's masterpiece in context of 14th century culture. Selected cantos will connect with such topics
as books and readers in the manuscript era, life in society dominated by the Catholic church (sinners
vs. saints, Christian pilgrimage routes, the great Franciscan and Dominican orders), Dante's politics as
a Florentine exile (power struggles between Pope and Emperor), his classical and Biblical literary
models, his genius as a poet in the medieval structures of allegory, symbolism, and numerology. Field
trip to University of Pennsylvania Rare Book Collection. Text in Italian with facing English translation.
SM 288. (CINE240) Modern Italian Culture. (M)
Topics will vary.
SM 250. (FREN250, GSWS253) Female Bodies, Different Bodies. (M)
This course examines how women and gays have been depicted and interpreted in the most recent
Italian novels and films. Moreover, this class analyzes the most important aspects of Italian Feminist
thought. A selection from Rosi Braidotti's "Patterns of Dissonance" will be read in class. We shall read
novels by Natalia Ginzburg ("Family Sayings"), Aldo Busi ("Seminar on Youth"), Pier Vittorio Tondelli
("Separate Rooms"), Alberto Moravia ("Two Women"). We shall discuss the following films: "Ernesto",
"Mary Forever", "Portrait of a Woman", "The City of Women", "Forgetting Venice". Course conducted in
English.
SM 260. Worldviews in Collision. (M)
This course explores the radical conflicts that developed in the 16th and 17th century Europe when
Protestant reformers, scientific discoveries, and geographical explorations challenged a long-held
Medieval worldview and the authority of the Roman Catholic Church. These historical developments
will be studied in comparison with parallel modern issues, such as Darwinism, separation of church
and state, multicultural religious conflicts. Historical readings: Machiavelli's comic play Mandragola, the
vitriolic polemic involving Martin Luther, Thomas More, and King Henry VII; Thomas Campanella's
Utopian dialogue The City of the Sun, selections from the scientists Copernicus and Galileo, and from
The History of the Council of Trent by the Venetian Paolo Sarpi. Modern texts: Osborne's Luther,
Brecht's Galileo, and a classic Hollywood film Utopia, Frank Capra's Lost Horizon. In introductory and
final units, we shall consider how 16th and 17th century poetry and visual arts mirrored their turbulent
times, with an attention to the Petrarchan tradition (Vittoria Colonna, Marino) and stylistic changes in
Italian painting, sculpture, and architecture from Renaissance to Mannerist to Baroque.
SM 280. Films From Literature. (M)
Topics vary.
SM 300. (ARTH301, CINE300) Topics in Italian History, Literature, and Culture. (M) Topics will
vary.
Topics vary. Please check the department's website for course description: http://www.sas.upenn.edu/
italians/courses

Page 21 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 310. (COML310, GSWS310) The Medieval Reader. (M)
Through a range of authors including Augustine, Dante, Petrarch, Galileo, and Umberto Eco, this
course will explore the world of the book in the manuscript era. We will consider 1) readers in fictionmale and female, good and bad; 2) books as material objects produced in monasteries and their
subsequent role in the rise of the universities; 3) medieval women readers and writers; 4) medieval
ideas of the book as a symbol (e.g., the notion of the world as God's book); 5) changes in book culture
brought about by printing and electronicmedia. Lectures with discussion in English, to be
supplemented by visual presentations and a visit to the Rare Book Room in Van Pelt Library. No
prerequisites.
SM 322. (CINE340, COML280) Italian Cinema. (M)
The course will consist of a broad and varied sampling of classic Italian films from WWII to the
present. The curriculum will be divided into four units: (1) The Neorealist Revolution, (2) Metacinema,
(3) Fascism and War Revisited, and (4) Postmodernism or the Death of the Cinema. One of the aims
of the course will be to develop a sense of "cinematic literacy"--to develop critical techniques that will
make us active interpretators of the cinematic image by challenging the expectations that Hollywood
has implanted in us: that films be action-packed wish-fulfillment fantasies. Italian cinema will invite us
to re-examine and revise the very narrow conception that we Americans have of the medium. We will
also use the films as a means to explore the postwar Italian culture so powerfully reflected, and in turn,
shaped, by its national cinema. Classes will include close visual analysis of films using video clips and
slides. The films will be in Italian with English subtitles and will include works of Fellini, Antonioni, De
Sica, Visconti, Pasolini, Wertuller, Rossellini, Rossellini, Bertolucci and Moretti.
Students will be asked actively to participate in class discussion, and to write a series of critical
papers keyed to the units around which the course will be organized. Substantial Writing Component.
SM 333. (COML333, ENGL323) Dante's Divine Comedy. (M) When crosslisted with ENGL 323, this
is a Benjamin Franklin Seminar
In this course we will read the Inferno, the Purgatorio and the Paradiso, focusing on a series of
interrelated problems raised by the poem: authority, fiction, history, politics and language. Particular
attention will be given to how the Commedia presents itself as Dante's autobiography, and to how the
autobiographical narrative serves as a unifying thread for this supremely rich literary text.
Supplementary readings will include Virgil's Aeneid and selections from Ovid's Metamorphoses. All
readings and written work will be in English. Italian or Italian Studies credit will require reading Italian
text the original language and writing about their themes in Italian. This course may be taken for
graduate credit, but additional work and meetings with the instructor will be required.
SM 340. (HIST338) Topics in the Renaissance. (M)
Content Varies. Possible contents may be: Renaissance Women Writers, Love and Sexuality in the
Renaissance.
SM 341. (ARTH301) Topics: Italian Art. (M)
SM 351. Mad Love. (M)
The history of an emotion and how it emerges in Italian literature, music and film.

Page 22 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 360. (COML363) Semiotics and Rhetoric. (M)
A survey of major currents in the modern theory of signs and languages, ranging from linguistics
through the perspectives of semiotics, rhetoric and hermeneutics. Readings from modern works on
semiotical and rhetorical theory as well as analysis of primary texts in Italian literature from Dante to
Svevo, as well as other forms of communication including advertising, journalism, film and television.
All readings in English.
398. Honors Thesis. (C)
SM 380. (CINE379, COML382) Italian Literature of the 20th Century. (M)
Topics vary, covering a range of genres and authors.
The reading material and the bibliographical references will be provided in a course reader. Further
material will be presented in class. Requirements include class attendance, preparation, and
participation, a series of oral responses, and a final oral presentation.
SM 383. 20th-Century Italian Novel. (M)
SM 385. Modern Theater. (M)
A study of theater in Italian, beginning with Pirandello.
399. Independent Study. (C)
499. Independent Study. (A)

Graduate-Level Courses
SM 501. (COML503) Italian Literary Theory. (M) Taught occasionally. This requirement is normally
satisfied by taking the Comparative Literature course in literary theory.
Basic issues in literary theory.
SM 520. (COML520) Medieval "Autobiography": Augustine to Petrarch. (M) Brownlee.
The development of a new authorial subject in Medieval and Early Modern first-person narrative.
SM 530. (COML601, ENGL524, RELS537) Medieval Italian Literature. (M)
Medieval Italian society, art, intellectual and political history. Please check the department's website for
the course description. http://www.sas.upenn.edu/italians/graduate/courses

Page 23 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 531. (COML533, ENGL531, ITAL333) Dante's Commedia I. (M) This course may sometimes be
taught as the first part of a two-semester sequence.
"Divine Comedy" in the context of Dante's medieval worldview and culture. Please check the
department's website for the course description. http://www.sas.upenn.edu/italians/graduate/courses
Dante Visualizing: Dante Visualizing and Dante Visualized. Dante's Commedia has inspired art, but
at the same time art is present within the Comedy itself, through images, metaphors, descriptions adn
even more concrete examples. This course aims at discussing these aspects, taking inot consideration
also the philosophical, political and religious background of these motifs. While analyzing images in
and from the Commedia, we will look at illustrations and artistic interpretations, spanning from
medieval illuminations and Renaissance printed boooks (mainly from Van Pelt Library) to
contemporary examples, and focusing on artists such as Giotto, Botticelli, Michelangelo, Blake, Dore,
and Dali. The course will be taught in English.
SM 532. (COML532) Divina Commedia II. (M) Prerequisite(s): Italian 531.
"Divine Comedy" in the context of Dante's medieval worldview and culture.
SM 534. (COML534, GSWS534) Women in Poetry. (M) Prerequisite(s): Reading knowledge of Italian.
SM 535. (COML524) Petrarch. (M)
Petrarch's life and work in the context of Italian and European culture and society.
SM 537. (COML521, GSWS537) Boccaccio. (M) Brownlee.
Boccaccio's life and work in the context of Italian and European culture and society.
SM 539. (COML548) Cracking the Code: Numerology and Literature. (M)
In English. This course reconstructs traditions of Western number symbolism from antiquity (Plato, the
Pythagoreans) to the early modern period with readings both in encyclopedic treatises on Arithmetic
(Macrobius, Martianus Capella, Rhabanus Maurus) and in literary texts that are numerical
compositions (Augustine's Confessions, Petrarch's epistle on the ascent of Mt. Ventoux, Dante's Vita
Nuova and Commedia, Boccaccio's Diana's Hunt, the Old French Vie de St. Alexis, and Umberto
Eco's The Name of the Rose). Discussion will focus on numerology as it relates to the medieval
esthetic of order, the literary text as microcosmic counterpart to God's macrocosm, veiled meaning,
and "difficult" poetics. We shall also consider the end of the tradition and what changes in science and
culture brought about the disappearance of number symbolism in literature, except for a few moderns
(e. g. Thomas Mann). Cross-listed with COML 548.
SM 540. (COML540, ENGL540, SPAN540) Topics: Renaissance Culture. (M)
Renaissance Italian society, art, intellectual and political history.
The development of courts is usually described as one of the main factors in the flourishing of
Renaissance art, thanks to the patronage of the lords of some of Italy's most important city-states. But
this patronage influenced not only painting, sculpture and architecture, but also literature, poetry and
philosophy. This course will analyze some of the most signficant literary masterpieces of this vibrant
period, by focusing on the particular characteristics of centers like Florence, Rome, Urbino, Ferrara,
Naples, as well as on the broader circulation and impact of many of these works and ideas in Europe.
The autors considered will include Poliziano, Castiglione, Ariosto, and Machiavelli. The course will be
taught in English, though readings will also be available in Italian upon request.

Page 24 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 562. (COML508) World Views in Collision. (M)
The impact of paradigm shifts on Italian and European culture.
SM 601. Time and Literature. (M)
The perceptions of Time differ according to various societies, conceptions of history, religious and
literary traditions. Literature not only inhabits Time, but forges it. The course will focus on
representations and elaborations of time throughout the Italian culture from Dante to the XX Century.
We will deal also with the theoretical issues connected with the relation between time and history. The
course will be taught in Italian. Undergraduates need permission.
SM 584. (CINE584, COML576) 20th-Century Italian Novel and Film. (M)
The course will involve an exploration of a number of works of prose fiction and, when possible, the
screening of their filmic adaptations. We will consider such genres as the historical novel (Tomasi di
Lampedusa's Il gattopardo), biography (Dacia Mariani's La lunga vita di Marianna Ucria),
autobiography (Gavino Ledda's Padre padrone), the mystery novel (Leonardo Sciascia's A ciascuno il
suo), the epistolary novel (Oriana Fallaci's Lettera ad un bambino mai nato), the political thriller
(Antonio Tabucchi's Sostiene Pereira), "anthropological" memoir (Carlo Levi's Christ Stopped at Eboli),
the psycho-political case study (Alberto Moravia's II conformista) and the regional short story
(selections from Luigi Pirandello's Novelle per un anno). The class will be conducted as a seminar
requiring a great deal of student participation.
SM 586. (CINE548) Italian Women Directors. (M)
In Peter Bondanella' s book, "Italian Cinema, from Neorealism to the Present," only two Italian women
directors are mentioned: Lina Wertmuller and Liliana Cavani. However, in recent years, the Italian
cinema has generated a new wave of Italian women directors who have significantly made their mark
on the national cinematic imagination. Francesca Archibugi, Roberta Torre, Cristina e Francesca
Comencini, Antonietta De Lillo, Fiorella Infascelli, Anna Negri,Laura Muscardin among otheestablished
themselves as important voices of the last generation of Italian filmmakers in feature films, Angela
Ricci Lucchi in the realm of non-fiction films and Alina Marazzi in the realm of documentary. In this
course, we are going to explore their films, in connection to feminist and post-feminist culture in Italy,
examining the originality of their approach and their relationships to the challenges offeredby the
advent of new technologies. The course will be taught in Italian.
SM 588. (CINE548, COML587) Cinema and the Sister Arts. (M)
Cinema as a pan-generic system constructed of other art forms, including fiction, theater, painting,
photography, music and dance.
SM 602. (COML602) Tools of the Trade. (M)
Theoretical and practical aspects of academic research. Please check the department's website for
the course description. http://www.sas.upenn.edu/italians/graduate/courses
SM 603. Sociolinguistic Varieties. (M)
SM 630. (COML630, ENGL795, FREN630) Medieval Italian Lierature. (M)
Medieval Italian society, art, intellectual and political history. Advanced level course.

Page 25 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 631. (COML632) Dante's Commedia. (M)
"Divine Comedy" in the context of Dante's medieval worldview and culture. Advanced level course.
SM 634. Woman's Place. (M)
Poetry by women and about women. Advanced level course.
SM 640. (COML641, HIST620) Studies in the Italian Renaissance. (M)
Renaissance Italian society, art, intellectual and political history. Advanced level course.
SM 660. 18th Century Italian Culture. (M)
18th century Italian society, art, intellectual and political history.
SM 672. Narrativa '800-'900. (M)
Modern and contemporary Italian fiction.
SM 681. (CINE684) Represen Women Ital Cine. (M)
SM 684. (CINE684) 20th-Century Novel. (M)
Contemporary Italian fiction
990. Masters Thesis. (C)
995. Dissertation. (C)
998. Tutorial. (C)
999. Independent Study. (C)

Undergraduate Level Courses

Page 26 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 101. Italian Survival Kit: The Language and Culture of getting around in Italy. Veneziano
Broccia.
The following course is delivered in a fully online format in order to allow more flexibility for LPS
students. Class sessions are offered through a course website and include live lectures and interactive
discussions through both direct messaging and voice over internet. Between classes, the learning
experience is extended through assignments, threaded discussions and office hours. For additional
information, please visit http://www.sas.upenn.edu/lps/online
This online course provides the flexibility of distance-learning and content that is taught efficiently in
order to be used practically. If you are going to Italy and questioning how you will survive your total
immersion experience, this course will provide you with the linguistic and cultural survival skills you will
need to effectively function in Italy and fully enjoy its wonders. In this course, you will learn and
practice the language you need to talk about: yourself; others; travel; public transportation; housing;
food; shopping; technology; health; money, etc. Class meetings combine original as well as online,
authentic content. Adobe Connect allows students to engage in collaborative interaction under the
instructor's supervision. Students participate in conversations that replicate day-to-day life in Italy
thereby developing the skills needed for face-to-face and online situations.
This course is open to students who have never taken Italian and who don't intend to satisfy the
language requirement by taking courses in Italian.

PORTUGUESE (PRTG)
Basic Language Courses
SM 110. Elementary Portuguese I. (A)
Portuguese 110 is a first-semester introductory language course for students who have not studied
Portuguese before, or who have had very little exposure to the language. The course will emphasize
the development of foundational reading, writing, listening and speaking abilitites within a cultural
context. Students will participate in paired and group activities designed to elicit meaningful and
accurate exchanges of information. The course will introduce students to Portuguese and Lusophone
culture through a variety of authentic materials, including texts, songs, films and other audio and video
material. Classes will be conducted in Portuguese.
SM 114. Portuguese for Spanish Speakers. (C)
Portuguese 114 is designed for students who have studied Spanish. The course begins with exposure
to basic vocabulary and structures, advancing at an accelerated pace. Classroon activities will
emphasize pronunciation, spoken production as well as language structures and vocabulary. Students
will participate in pairs, small-groups and whole-class activities that focus on the meaningful and
accurate exchange of information. The class will be conducted in Portuguese.
SM 120. Elementary Portuguese II. (B) Prerequisite(s): PRTG 110 or equivalent.
This class continues the development of a basic proficiency that will help reinforce the student's
abilities and confidence. A broad range of lively, high-interest readings such as newspaper and
magazine articles in current events on Brazilian culture will allow the student to gain a genuine sense
of current usage. A Brazilian movie is presented and discussed in groups. Daily homework
assignments involve writing exercises, short compositions and group projects.

Page 27 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 130. Intermediate Portuguese I. (A) Prerequisite(s): PRTG 120 or instructor's permission.
This is an intermediate course designed, in a four-course strand, for students who have taken at least
two semesters of Portuguese. Classroom activities will emphasize pronunciation, spoken production
as well as language structures and vocabulary with the objective to develop your skills in Portuguese.
In addition, students will explore movies, music and other media to further develop reading, speaking
and interpretive skills in Portuguese. The course will be conducted in Portuguese.
SM 140. Intermediate Portuguese II. (B) Prerequisite(s): PRTG 130 or instructor's permission.
This is a forth-semester intermediate course, in a four-course strand, designed for students who have
taken at least three semesters of Portuguese. Classroon activities will emphasize pronunciation,
spoken production, grammar and language structures, and vocabulary at the advanced intermediate
level. Students will explore movies, readings, news, music and other media as they further develop
speaking, writing, reading and interpretive skills in Portuguese. The course will be conducted in
Portuguese.

Undergraduate-Level Courses
SM 202. Advanced Portuguese. (M) Prerequisite(s): PRTG 134, PRTG 140 or instructor's
permission.
This course is designed for students who have already taken basic and intermediate levels of
Portuguese. It complements students' knowledge of Portuguese by emphasizing the use of advanced
grammatical structures and vocabulary. Classes will focus on practicing such advanced language
structures by reading a diverse range of texts, including short stories by different authors of the
Lusophone countries, and two novels; speaking and writing about a variety of contemporary texts;
watching movies and documentaries; and listening to news, songs and other authentic audio material.
The emphasis will be on language usage and culture. This course will be conducted in Portuguese.
SM 215. Portuguese for the Professions. (D) Prerequisite(s): Portuguese 202.
Portuguese for the Professions is designed for advanced-level students to develop their ability to use a
wide technical vocabulary. The course will cover an array of topics in the areas of Economy, Politics,
Science, Technology, Law and others as they pertain to the societies and cultures of the Lusophone
countries, with particular emphasis placed on Brazil. Through readings, movies, discussions, essays
and presentations, students will enhance their ability to write about and discuss these topics while
employing the appropriate technical vocabulary.
SM 216. Business Portuguese I. (A)
SM 221. (COLL223, LALS231) Perspectives in Brazilian Culture. (M) Mercia Flannery.Prerequisite
(s): Portuguese 202.
Topics vary. For current course description, please see department's webpage: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc

Page 28 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 217. Portuguese for the Professions II. (B) Prerequisite(s): PRTG 202.
Portuguese for the Professions II is a second-semester course designed to provide advanced-level
students with exposition to, and practice in, a wide variety of technical vocabulary, and to develop their
communicative skills on topics related to Brazil's economic, social and historical context. Classroom
activities will be based on the readings and discussions of articles, papers, the viewing of
documentaries and other visual media, covering an array of topics within the proposed themes. The
course will be conducted in Portuguese.
SM 240. (CINE232, COLL223, LALS240) Topics in Brazilian Culture. (C) Prerequisite(s):
Prerequisite is Portuguese 202.
Topics vary. For current course description, please see department's webpage: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc

ROMANCE LANGUAGES (ROML)
Basic Language Courses
SM 250. (HIST179) GOLDEN AGE SPAIN. (C)

Undergraduate Level Courses
SM 112. Beginning Haitian Creole. (M) Staff.Prerequisite(s): none. offered as a hybrid course with an
online component
This course is an introduction to HAitian Creole language. Students will explore the complex narrative
of Haiti and its people. The class draws on a variety of methods and media to develop students'
abilities in oral and written communication. Students with research, professional, or personal interests
in Haiti or Haitian Diaspora are encouraged to enroll.
SM 113. Haitian Creole.
SM 218. SA: Miscellaneous - Lit.
SM 290. (COML284, ENGL270, LALS291) Lat American Literature. (M)
SM 390. (COML360, ENGL394) Introduction to Literary Theory. (M)
Topics vary.

Graduate Level Courses
SM 512. (CLST511, COML501, ENGL571, GRMN534, SLAV500) History of Literary Theory. (M)

Page 29 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 690. (FREN601, FREN690, ITAL690, SPAN609) Applied Linguistics and Language Teaching.
(M)
This is a year long course required of all first-year Teaching Assistants in French and Italian. It is
designed to provide new instructors with the necessary practical support to carry out their teaching
responsibilities effectively. It will also introduce students to various approaches to foreign language
teaching as well as to current issues in second language acquisition.
SM 691. (EDUC673, GRMN517) Technology and Foreign Languages. (M) Prerequisite(s): Romance
Languages 690 or its equivalent.
This course will introduce participants to the field of technology and foreign language teaching and
learning. It will review the pertinent theoretical underpinnings for the pedagogically-sound use of
technology in the teaching of languages starting with a brief overview of the historical development of
the field. Students will learn to evaluate existing programs and applications with a critical eye through a
systematic examination of projects which have been implemented both here at Penn and elsewhere.
The course will also have weekly hands-on workshops to introduce participants to the design and
developmeent of multimedia materials, including image, video and sound editing. The focus will be
primarily on Web-based design and delivery. All participants will select a project to work on during the
course of the semester; in addition they develop an online teaching portfolio.

SPANISH (SPAN)
Basic Language Courses
SM 110. Elementary Spanish I. (C) Prerequisite(s): A score below 380 on the SAT II or below 285 on
the online placement examination.
Spanish 110 is a first-semester elementary language course designed for students who have not
previously studied Spanish or who have had very little exposure to the language. This course
emphasizes the development of foundational reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills while
exploring the rich cultural mosaic of the Spanish-speaking world. Students will participate in pair,
small-group and whole-class activities that focus on meaningful and accurate communication skills in
the target language.
Students who have previously studied Spanish but have not taken the SAT II exam must take the
online placement examination.
SM 112. Elementary Spanish I and II: Accelerated. (A) Prerequisite(s): Permit required from the
course coordinator.
Spanish 112 is an intensive course designed for students who have already satisfied the language
requirement in another language and have not previously studied Spanish. By combining the
curriculum of Spanish 110 and 120, Spanish 112 seeks to develop students' reading, writing, listening
and speaking abilities while exploring the rich cultural mosaic of the Spanish-speaking world. Students
will participate in pair, small-group and whole-class activities that focus on meaningful and accurate
communication skills in the target language.

Page 30 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 115. Spanish for the Medical Professions, Elementary I. (A) Prerequisite(s): A score below 380
on the SAT II or below 285 on the online placement examination. Offered through the Penn Language
Center.
Spanish 115 is a first-semester elementary medical Spanish language course and the first in the
Spanish for the Medical Professions sequence. It is designed for students with no prior coursework in
Spanish. This course teaches beginning students the fundamentals of practical Spanish with an
emphasis on medical situations and basic medical terminology. In this course, particular attention will
be given to developing speaking and listening skills, as well as cultural awareness. It incorporates
activities, vocabulary, and readings of particular interest to healthcare practitioners, while adhering to
the goals and scope of Spanish 110, the first-semester Spanish language course.
Students who have previously studied Spanish but have not taken the SAT II exam must take the
online placement examination.
SM 130. Intermediate Spanish I. (C) Prerequisite(s): Successful completion of Spanish 112, 120, 121
or 125 or a score of 450-540 on the SAT II or 384-453 on the online placement examination.
Spanish 130 is a first-semester intermediate-level language course that emphasizes the development
of the four basic skills (reading, writing, listening and speaking skills) within a culturally based context.
Class time will focus on communicative activities that combine grammatical concepts, relevant
vocabulary, and cultural themes. Students will participate in pair, small-group and whole-class
activities to practice linguistics skills in meaningful contexts. Major course goals include: the acquisition
of intermediate-level vocabulary, the controlled use of the past tense, and the development of writing
skills at a paragraph level with transitions.
SM 120. Elementary Spanish II. (C) Prerequisite(s): Successful completion of Spanish 110 or 115 or
permission of the course coordinator.
The continuation of Spanish 110, Spanish 120 is a second-semester elementary language course.
See the description of Spanish 110.
SM 121. Elementary Spanish I and II: Advanced Beginners. (C) Prerequisite(s): A score of 380-440
on the SAT II or 285-383 on the online placement examination.
Spanish 121 is designed for students who have some prior experience in Spanish. This course
provides a quick-paced review of material normally covered in a first-semester Spanish course and
then proceeds to introduce new material so students will be prepared to take Spanish 130 during the
subsequent semester.
As other Spanish courses, Spanish 121 emphasizes the development of foundational reading,
writing, listening, and speaking skills while exploring the rich cultural mosaic of the Spanish-speaking
world. Students will participate in pair, small-group and whole-class activities that focus on meaningful
and accurate communication skills in the target language.
SM 125. Spanish for the Medical Professions, Elementary II. (B) Prerequisite(s): Successful
completion of Spanish 110 or 115 or a score of 380-440 on the SAT II or 285-383 on the online
placement examination. Offered through the Penn Language Center.
The continuation of Spanish 115, Spanish 125 is a second-semester elementary medical Spanish
language course. See the description of Spanish 115.

Page 31 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 134. Intermediate Spanish I and II: Accelerated. (B) Prerequisite(s): Spring semester
prerequisites: Permit required from the course coordinator. Summer prerequisites: Successful
completion of Spanish 112, 120, 121 or 125 or a score of 450-540 on the SAT II or 384-453 on the
online placement examination.
Spanish 134 is an intensive intermediate-level language course that covers the material presented in
Spanish 130 and Spanish 140. The course emphasizes the development of the four canonical skills
(reading, writing, listening and speaking) within a culturally based context. Class time will focus on
communicative activities that combine grammatical concepts, relevant vocabulary, and cultural themes.
Students will participate in pair, small-group and whole-class activities to practice linguistics skills in a
meaningful context. Major course goals include: the acquisition of intermediate-level vocabulary, the
controlled use of the past tense and major uses of the subjunctive, and the development of writing
skills.
During the spring semester, Spanish 134 is limited to those students who have satisfied the
language requirement in another language. During the summer, the course is open to all students who
meet placement requirements.
This course satisfies the language requirement in Spanish.
SM 135. Spanish for the Medical Professions, Intermediate I. (A) Prerequisite(s): Successful
completion of Spanish 112, 120, 121 or 125 or a score of 450-540 on the SAT II or 384-453 on the
online placement examination. Offered through the Penn Language Center.
Spanish 135 is a first-semester intermediate-level medical Spanish language course that emphasizes
the development of the four basic skills (reading, writing, listening, and speaking), and the acquisition
of medical terminology. Students will be expected to participate in classroom activities such as roleplays based on typical office and emergency procedures in order to develop meaningful and accurate
communication skills in the target language. Students will also review and acquire forms and
structures useful both inside and outside the medical field.
SM 140. Intermediate Spanish II. (C) Prerequisite(s): Successful completion of Spanish 130 or 135
or a score of 550-640 on the SAT II or 454-546 on the online placement examination.
Spanish 140, the continuation of Spanish 130, is a fourth-semester language course that offers
students the opportunity to acquire communicative skills (reading, writing, listening and speaking)
while developing their awareness and appreciation of the Spanish-speaking world. Topics studied may
include the environment, the arts, social relations, and conflict and violence.
This course satisfies the language requirement in Spanish.
SM 145. Spanish for the Medical Professions, Intermediate II. (C) Prerequisite(s): Successful
completion of Spanish 130 or 135 or a score of 550-640 on the SAT II or 454-546 on the online
placement examination. Offered through the Penn Language Center.
The continuation of Spanish 135, Spanish 145 is a second-semester intermediate-level medical
Spanish language course. See the description of Spanish 135.
This course satisfies the language requirement in Spanish.

Undergraduate-Level Courses
SM 180. Spanish Conversation. (E) Prerequisite(s): Residence in Modern Language House.
Must be a resident of the Modern Language College House.

Page 32 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 212. Advanced Spanish II: Grammar and Composition. (C) Prerequisite(s): Spanish 202 or
equivalent.
Spanish 212 is an advanced-level language course that emphasizes the acquisition of the tools
necessary for successful written expression in Spanish. These tools include a solid knowledge of the
major points of Spanish grammar, an ample vocabulary, control of the mechanics of the language
(spelling, punctuation, etc.), and a throrough understanding of the writing process. Throughout the
semester, students will use these tools to analyze authentic texts and to produce a variety of written
assignments. By the end of the course, students will have developed their awareness of the norms of
standard Spanish and learned to incorporate these features into their own writing. The class will be
conducted in Spanish and students are expected to speak in Spanish at all times.
SM 202. Advanced Spanish. (C) Prerequisite(s): Successful completion of Spanish 140 or equivalent.
The purpose of this course is twofold: (a) to develop students' communicative abilities in Spanish, that
is, speaking, listening, reading and writing, and (b) to increase their awareness and understanding of
Hispanic cultures and societies. Homework and classroom activities are designed to help students
build their oral proficiency, expand and perfect their knowledge of vocabulary and grammatical
structures, improve their reading and writing skills, and develop their critical thinking abilities. The
material for this class includes short stories, newspaper articles, poems, songs, cartoons, video clips
and a novel, such as Sergio Bizio's Rabia. At the completion of this course students will feel confident
discussing and debating a variety of contemporary issues (cultural and religious practices, family
relationships, gender stereotypes, political events, immigration to the USA, etc.).
SM 208. Business Spanish I. (C) Prerequisite(s): Successful completion of Spanish 140 or
equivalent.
Spanish for Business I provides advanced-level language students with technical vocabulary and
communicative skills covering business concepts as they apply to the corporate dynamics of the
Spanish-speaking world, with a special emphasis on Latin America. Through readings, presentations,
discussions, and video materials, we shall analyze those cultural aspects that characterize the
business environment in the region as well as focus on economies and markets in light of their history,
politics, resources and pressing international concerns.
SM 209. Business Spanish II. (A) Prerequisite(s): Permission from the instructor.
Business Spanish II, Advanced Spanish for Business, is specifically designed for advanced speakers
of Spanish (e.g., native speakers, heritage speakers, students who have studied in a Spanishspeaking country for at least one semester, and those who have attained an equivalent level of
linguistic competency). Students will take an in-depth look at the corporate dynamics of a number of
countries in Latin America, focusing on their economies and markets, as well as on the cultural and
business protocols of each region. Through the creation of an entrepreneurial project and the writing of
a business plan, students will enhance their business and language skills.
SM 215. Spanish for the Professions I. (C) Prerequisite(s): Spanish 202 or equivalent.
Spanish for the Professions is designed to provide advanced-level language students with a wideranging technical vocabulary and the enhancement of solid communicative skills within the cultural
context of several developing Latin American countries. Focusing on topics such as politics, economy,
society, health, environment, education, science and technology, the class will explore the realities and
underlying challenges facing Latin America. Through essays, papers, articles, research, discussions,
case studies, and videotapes, we shall take an in-depth look at the dynamics of Latin American
societies. The course will focus on--but not be restricted to--Mexico, Cuba and Argentina.

Page 33 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 219. Hispanic Texts and Contexts. (C) Prerequisite(s): Spanish 202 or Spanish 212.
The primary aim of this course is to develop students' knowledge of the geographical, historical and
cultural contexts of the Spanish-speaking world. At the same time that they are introduced to research
techniques and materials available in Spanish, students strengthen their language skills through
reading, oral presentations, video viewing, and regular writing assignments. The course is designed to
give students a broad understanding of Hispanic culture that will prepare them for upper-level course
work and study abroad.
SM 223. Introduction to Literary Analysis. (C) Arts & Letters Sector. All Classes.Prerequisite(s):
Spanish 202 or Spanish 212.
Literature from Spain and Latin America contains a wealth of information about language, history, and
culture. The goal of this course is to help students develop skills to carefully read Spanish literary
works while preparing them for upper-level courses and study abroad. We begin reviewing the main
characteristics of various literary movements and of the four genres (narrative, poetry, theater and
essay). During the second part of the semester, students become familiarized with a wide variety of
theoretical approaches to the study of literature with the purpose of applying them to their own
analytical writing. In the last part of the course students produce their own essays on a text chosen by
them and based on research. Sample essays written by other students and included in the textbook
will serve as models. Throughout the course students will have ample opportunities to hone their skills
through the close reading and class discussion of varied and stimulating works by Miguel de
Cervantes, Jorge Luis Borges, Gabriel Garcia Marquez, Roberto Bolano, etc.
SM 250. (COML252, LALS252) Major Works of Spanish and Latin American Literature. (C) Arts &
Letters Sector. All Classes.
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc
SM 348. Don Quijote. (M) Prerequisite(s): Spanish 219 or Spanish 223.
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc
SM 317. Spanish Phonetics and Morphology. (M) Prerequisite(s): Spanish 219 or Spanish 223.
An introduction to articulatory phonetics designed to give the student a practical knowledge of the
Spanish sound system as compared with English. Also some work in acoustic phonetics. Students
learn to use the phonetic alphabet. Basic work is followed by an introduction to the linguistic analysis
of sound systems, with concentration on Spanish and English phonology. Some introductory work on
regional and social variations of pronunciation in the Spanish-speaking world. Lastly, an introduction to
morphological analysis of language, with particular attention to the structure of the Spanish verb and
word formation. Lectures and discussion of readings.
SM 319. History of the Spanish Language. (M) Prerequisite(s): Spanish 219 or Spanish 223.
A survey treatment of the development of Latin to modern Spanish, with emphasis on relations
between external history and the development of grammatical structure and vocabulary, and major
sound shifts. Lectures and discussions of reading.
SM 330. Medieval Literature. (M) Prerequisite(s): Spanish 219 or Spanish 223.
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc

Page 34 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 350. (LALS350) Spanish Literature of the Golden Age. (M) Prerequisite(s): Spanish 219 or
Spanish 223.
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc
SM 351. Spanish Poetry of the Golden Age. (M) Prerequisite(s): Spanish 219.
A study of the major poets of the period including Garcilaso, Fray Luis de Leon, Herrera, San Juan de
la Cruz, Gongora, Lope de Vega, and Quevedo.
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc
SM 373. Spanish Romanticism, 1770-1870. (M) Prerequisite(s): Spanish 219 or Spanish 223.
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc
SM 380. (CINE380, LALS380) Contemporary Spanish Literature. (M) Prerequisite(s): Spanish 219
or Spanish 223.
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc
SM 384. (CINE384) Spanish Novel Since 1939. (M) Prerequisite(s): Spanish 219 or Spanish 223.
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc
SM 386. (CINE385, GSWS386, LALS386) Studies in Spanish Culture. (C) Prerequisite(s): Spanish
219 or Spanish 223.
This course covers topics in contemporary Spanish Culture, its specific emphasis varying with the
instructor. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the course description: course
description: https://www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc
SM 390. (CINE390, COML390, GSWS391, LALS396) Introduction to Spanish American
Literature. (M) Prerequisite(s): Spanish 219 or Spanish 223.
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc
SM 392. (LALS392) Colonial Latin American Literature. (M) Prerequisite(s): Spanish 219 or
Spanish 223.
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc
SM 394. (LALS394) Spanish American Fiction. (M) Prerequisite(s): Spanish 219 or Spanish 223.
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc

Page 35 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 395. (LALS395) Hispanic Theater. (M) Prerequisite(s): Spanish 219 or Spanish 223.
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc
SM 396. (CINE396, GSWS396, LALS397) Studies in Spanish American Culture. (M) Prerequisite
(s): Spanish 219 or Spanish 223.
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc
SM 397. (CINE397, GSWS397, LALS398) History of Spanish American Culture. (M) Prerequisite
(s): Spanish 219 or Spanish 223.
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc
SM 400. Conference Course for Majors. (A)
Permission required.

Graduate-Level Courses
SM 580. Contemporary Spanish Literature. (M)
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc
SM 600. History of the Spanish Language. (M)
The development of the Ibero-Romance dialects from late Latin to medieval times.
SM 624. The Spanish Picaresque Novel. (M)
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc
SM 648. The Novelist Cervantes. (M)
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc
SM 630. (ARTH740, COML628, ROML631) Studies in the Spanish Middle Ages. (M)
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc
SM 631. Medieval Spanish Epic to Romance. (M)
Analysis of the Spanish epic from its origins to its prosification in chronicles, later manifestations, and
relationship to the prose romance.

Page 36 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 640. (COML640) Studies in the Spanish Renaissance. (M)
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc
SM 682. (COML682) Seminar on Literary Theory. (A)
Topics vary. See the Spanish Department's website for the current offerings. http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/
roml/spanish/graduate/courses.html
SM 684. La Novela Realista. (M)
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc
SM 686. (CINE695) Studies in Spanish Culture. (M)
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc
SM 687. (COML687, ENGL539) The Spanish Avant-Garde. (M)
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc
SM 690. (COML691, LALS690) Studies in 19th- and 20th-Century Spanish American Literature.
(M)
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc
SM 692. (COML692, LALS692) Colonial Literature of Spanish America. (M)
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc
SM 693. Vanguardias culturales hispanoamericanas. (M)
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc
SM 694. (CINE694, COML694, LALS694) Modern Spanish American Narrative. (M)
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc
SM 697. (COML697) Studies in Latin American Culture. (M)
Topics vary. Please see the Spanish Department's website for the current course description: https://
www.sas.upenn.edu/hispanic-portuguese-studies/pc

Page 37 of 38

ROMANCE LANGUAGES
(AS) {ROML}
SM 698. Workshop on Scholarly Writing. (M)
This course aims to develop awareness about what constitutes effective scholarly prose in Spanish. It
proposes to hone the student's handling of writing as a vehicle for the expression of intellectual
thought, but also to develop a consciousness of the rhetorical strategies that can be used to advance
a critical argument effectively. Extensive writing exercises will be assigned; these will be followed by
intense and multiple redactions of the work originally produced. The ulitmate goal is to make students
develop precision, correctness, and elegance in written Spanish. Students will also work on a class
paper written previously, with a view to learning the process of transforming a short, limited expression
of an argument into a publishable article.
999. Independent Study. (C)

Page 38 of 38

