SOCIOLOGY
(AS) {SOCI}
L/R 001. (AFRC002) Introduction to Sociology. (C) Society Sector. All classes. Imoagene, Jacobs,
Lareau, Wilde, Zuberi.
We live in a country which places a premium on indivdual accomplishments. Hence, all of you worked
extremely hard to get into Penn. Yet, social factors also have an impact on life chance. This class
provides an oveview of how membership in social groups shapes the outcomes of individuals. We will
look at a range of topics from the organizational factors which promoted racial inequality in Ferguson,
Mo to the refusal of (mostly elite) parents to vaccinate their children. The experience of women and
men in the labor market -- and the social factors that lead women to earn less than men -- is another
interesting topic taken up in the course. Who gets ahead in America? Course requirements include a
midterm, research paper (five to six pages), final and recitation activities. Students are not expected to
have any previous knowledge of the topic. Welcome to the course!
SM 002. Social Problems and Public Policy. (M) Bosk, Jacobs.
This course approaches some of today's important social and political issues from a sociological
vantage point. The course begins by asking where social problems come from. The main sociological
perspectives of Marx, Weber and Durkheim are developed in connection with the issues of inequality,
social conflict and community. We then turn to the social construction of social problems by examining
how various issues become defined as social problems. This involves a consideration of the role of the
media, social experts and social movements. The last section of the course considers how social
problems are addressed. Here we discuss the relative strengths and weaknesses of government
programs and regulations versus market-based approached. We also discuss the role of philanthropy
and volunteerism. Finally, we consider the risk of unanticipated consequences of reforms. Along the
way, we will consider a variety of social issues and social problems, including poverty, immigration,
crime, global warming, and education.
L/R 003. Deviance and Social Control. (C) Society Sector. All classes. Bosk.
A sociological analysis of the origins, development, and reactions surrounding deviance in
contemporary society. Topics include labeling theory, stigma, social organization, tradition, social
power, crime, sexual deviance, drug use, and racism. Theoretical and methodological issues will be
discussed and evaluated.
L/R 004. (GSWS004) The Family. (C) Society Sector. All classes. Harknett, Lareau.
Most men and women get married during their lifetimes. In addition, most men and women become
fathers and mothers at some point. This class presents social science evidence on the family. For
example, it shows how "greedy" workplaces, which require long work hours, creatework-family
conflicts for husbands and wives. The class also illuminates how men and women have different
experiences within families. The lectures will also examine how economic inequality shapes family life.
Students will have the opportunity to apply key concepts to daily life. They will also have an opportunity
to read research on a topic of interest. All are welcome.
L/R 005. American Society. (C) Humanities & Social Science Sector. Class of 2010 & beyond. Bosk.
Also fulfills General Requirement in Society for Class of 2009 and prior
What is American Society? The literary critic, Leslie Fielder once wrote,"...to be and
American...precisely to imagine a destiny rather than to inherit one; since we have always been,
insofar as we are Americans at all, inhabitants of myth rather than history..." The myths that we inherit
form the basis of American civil religion. In this course we will explore the elements of the myth that
form the basis of the civil religion as well as the facts on the ground that contradict our conceptions of
American Society: Examples of mythic elements and their contradiction that we will explore are: A
nation founded to pursue liberty and freedom yet allowed slavery, equality of opportunity and
persistent structural inequality, and a welcoming of the Immigrant coupled with a suspicion of the
outsider.

Page 1 of 26

SOCIOLOGY
(AS) {SOCI}
L/R 006. (AFRC006, ASAM006, URBS160) Race and Ethnic Relations. (C) Charles, Kao, Zuberi.
The course will focus on race and ethnicity in the United States. We begin with a brief history of racial
categorization and immigration to the U.S. The course continues by examining a number of topics
including racial and ethnic identity, interracial and interethnic friendships and marriage, racial attitudes,
mass media images, residential segregation, educational stratification, and labor market outcomes.
The course will include discussions of African Americans, Whites, Hispanics, Asian Americans and
multiracials.
007. (URBS265, GSWS007) Population and Society. (C) Society Sector. All classes. Flippen,
Harknett, Kohler, Zuberi.
The course serves as an introduction to the study of population and demography, including issues
pertaining to fertility, mortality, migration, and family formation and structure. Within these broad areas
we consider the social, economic, and political implications of current trends, including: population
explosion, baby bust, the impact of international migration on receiving societies, population aging,
racial classification, growing diversity in household composition and family structure, population and
environmental degradation, and the link between population and development/poverty.
SM 008. Introduction to Political Sociology. (M) Collins, Zuberi.
This course will introduce students to sociological approaches to politics, broadly understood. The
class will begin by discussing the nature of power and authority, the rise of the nation-state and the
significance of nationalism. Later topics will include social movements, urban political regimes,
globalization and transnationalism, citizenship, revolutions, and the rise (and fall?) of welfare states.
010. Social Stratification. (M) Society Sector. All classes. Jacobs.
In this course we study the current levels and historical trends of inequality in the United States
especially in cross-national comparative perspective. We discuss causes and consequences of
inequality as well as various policy efforts to deal with inequality. Topics include intergenerational social
mobility, income inequality, education, gender, race and ethnicity among others.
SM 011. (AFRC011, URBS112) Urban Sociology. (M) Flippen.
This course is a comprehensive introduction to the sociological study of urban areas. This includes
more general topics as the rise of cities and theories urbanism, as well as more specific areas of
inquiry, including American urbanism, segregation, urban poverty, suburbanization and sprawl,
neighborhoods and crime, and immigrant ghettos. The course will also devote significant attention to
globalization and the process of urbanization in less developed counties.

Page 2 of 26

SOCIOLOGY
(AS) {SOCI}
L/R 012. (ANTH012, HIST012) Globalization. (B) Humanities & Social Science Sector. Class of 2010
& beyond. Guillen, Spooner.
This course analyses the current state of globalization and sets it in historicit in historical perspective.
It applies the concepts and methods of anthropology, history, political economy and sociology to the
analysis and interpretation of what is actually happening in the course of the semester that relates to
the progress of globalization. We focus on a series of questions not only about what is happening but
about the growing awareness of it and the consequences of the increasing awareness. In answering
these questions we distinguish between active campaigns to cover the world (e.g. Christian and
Muslim proselytism, free-trade agreements, democratization) and the unplanned diffusion of new ways
of organizing trade, capital flows, tourism and remote interaction via the Internet. The body of the
course deals with particular dimensions of globalization, reviewing both the early and recent history of
each. The overall approach is historical and comparative, setting globalization on the larger stage of
the economic, political and cultural development of various parts of the modern world.
The course is taught collaboratively by an anthropologist, an historian, and a sociologist, offeringthe
opportunity to compare and contrast distinct disciplinary approaches. It seeks to develop a general
social-science-based theoretical understanding of the various historical dimensions of globalization:
economic, political, social and cultural.
027. (AFRC001) Introduction to Africana Studies. (D) Humanities & Social Science Sector. Class of
2010 & beyond. Charles, Zuberi.
The aim of this course is to provide an interdisciplinary examination of the complex array of African
American and other African Diaspora social practices and experiences. This class will focus on both
classic texts and modern works that provide an introduction to the dynamics of African American and
African Diaspora thought and practice. Topics include: What is Africana Studies?; The History Before
1492; Creating the African Diaspora After 1500; The Challenge of Freedom; Race, Gender and Class
in the 20th Century; From Black Studies to Africana Studies: The Future of Africana Studies.
033. (STSC003) Technology & Society. (C) Society Sector. All classes. Staff.
Technology plays an increasing role in our understandings of ourselves, our communities, and our
societies, in how we think about politics and war, science and religion, work and play. Humans have
made and used technologies, though, for thousands if not millions of years. In this course, we will use
this history as a resource to understand how technolgoeis affect social relations, and coversely how
the culture of a society shapes the technologies it produces. Do different technolgoeis produce or
result from different economic systems like feudalism, capitalism and communism? Can specific
technologies promote democratic or authoritarian politics? Do they suggest or enforce different
patterns of race, class or gender relations? Among the technologies we'll consider will be large objects
like cathedrals, bridges, and airplanes; small ones like guns, clocks and birth control pills; and
networks like the electrical grid, the highway system and the internet.
SM 041. (AFRC041, EALC014, GSWS041, URBS010) Freshman Seminars. (D) Staff. Freshman
Seminars. Topics vary from semester to semester. See Freshman Seminar and Sociology websites for
current offerings.

Page 3 of 26

SOCIOLOGY
(AS) {SOCI}
L/R 100. (HSOC100) Introduction to Sociological Research. (C) Armenta, Harknett, Koppel, Park,
Smith, Wilde.
One of the defining characteristics of all the social sciences, including sociology, ia a commitment to
empirical research as the basis for knowledge. This course is designed to provide you with a basic
uderstanding of research in the social sciences and to enable you to think like a social scientist.
Through this course students will learn both the logic of sociological inquiry and the nuts and bolts of
doing empirical research. We will focus on such issues as the relationship between theory and
research, the logic of research design, issues of conceptualization and measurement, basic methods
of data collection, and what social scientists do with data once they have collected them. By the end of
the course, students will have completed sociological research projects utilizing different empirical
methods, be able to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of various research strategies, and read
(with understanding) published accounts of social science research.
L/R 101. (HSOC102) Bioethics. (C) Moreno.
This course will take an historical approach to the development of modern bioethics, which is the study
of ethical issues in medicine and the life sciences. The first part of the course will be devoted to an
introduction to the standard principles of academic bioethics and the way they have structured the field
over the last 35 years. We will then consider topics to which the principles have long been applied,
such as the care of gravely ill newborns, death and dying, and the ethics of research involving human
subjects. The last part of the course will address more recent life sciences policy areas including
genetics, cloning, stem cells, biodefense, and neuroscience in relation to national security. Throughout
the course I will emphasize the interplay between the development of bioethics and its cultural context.
111. (HSOC111) Health of Populations. (C) Elo, Kohler.
This course is designed to introduce students to the quantitative study of factors that influence the
health of populations. Topics to be addressed include methods for characterizing levels of health in
populations, comparative and historical perspectives on population health, health disparities, health
policy issues and the effectiveness of interventions for enhancing the health of populations. These
topics will be addressed both for developed and developing world populations. The course will focus on
specific areas of health and some of the major issues and conclusions pertaining to those domains.
Areas singled out for attention include chronic diseases and their major risk factors, such as smoking,
physical activity, dietary factors and obesity. Throughout the course, the focus will be on determining
the quality of evidence for health policy and understanding the manner in which it was generated.
L/R 103. (ASAM001) Asian Americans In Contemporary Society. (M) Society Sector. All classes.
Kao.
This class will introduce you to sociological research of Asian Americans and engage in the "model
minority" stereotype. We begin by a brief introduction to U.S. immigration history and sociological
theories about assimilation and racial stratification. The class will also cover research on racial and
ethnic identity, educational stratification, mass media images, interracial marriage, multiracials,
transracial adoption, and the viability of an Asian American panethnic identity. We will also examine
the similarities and differences of Asian Americans relative to other minority groups.
105. INDUS REL & HUM RES MGMT. (C)

Page 4 of 26

SOCIOLOGY
(AS) {SOCI}
110. The Rich and The Poor. (M) Armenta, Lareau.
Who is rich? Who is poor? This course examines how wealth and income are distributed in the United
States, and how its distribution affects indivduals, groups, institutions, and society. We will gain a fuller
understanding of what social class is and discuss how it affects all aspects of life, including: quality of
schooling, access to employment, child rearing, and even tastes, preferences, and identity. In addition
to two midterms and a final exam, students will be responsible for completing several assignments and
turning in a short research paper.
112. (AFRC112, GSWS114, URBS114) Discrimination: Sexual and Racial Conflict. (M) Society
Sector. All classes. Madden.
This course is concerned with the structure, the causes and correlates, and the government policies to
alleviate discrimination by race and gender in the United States.The central focus of the course is on
employment differences by race and gender and the extent to which they arise from labor market
discrimination versus other causes, although racial discrimination in housing is also considered. After
a comprehensive overview of the structures of labor and housing markets and of nondiscriminatory
reasons (that is, the cumulative effects of past discrimination and/or experiences) for the existence of
group differentials in employment, wages and residential locations, various theories ofthe sources of
current discrimination are reviewed and evaluated. Actual government policies and alternatives
policies are evaluated in light of both the empirical evidence on group differences and the alternative
theories of discrimination.
117. (GSWS117) Sociology of Work. (M) Jacobs, Leidner.
The material world is shaped and maintained through work, but so is the social world. How work is
organized, allocated, and rewarded determines the opportunities people have for developing their own
capacities, the kinds of ties they will have with others, and how much control they will have over their
own lives. We will consider various sociological perspectives on work and compare alternative ways of
organizing work, with a focus on the contemporary United States.
118. Sociology of Bioethics. (C) Bosk.
The Sociology of Bioethics explores the sociological approach to bioethics. The Sociology of Bioethics
is not a course in bioethics itself; rather than discussing the merits of a position (Is assisted suicide
ethical?), we will ask how the debate has been framed, who is promoting which arguments, why the
debate has arisen now, and how the issue is reflected in policy. In order to do so we will make use of
social science research, along with philosophical treaties, legislation, and the popular media. The
course is also not designed as a comprehensive treatment of the field; it will focus instead on choice
topics that we will explore in depth. Our goal is to understand the nature of the bioethics profession
and its modes of argumentation, and to explore the cultural, social, political, and professional
underpinnings of bioethical debates.
L/R 120. (AFRC120) Social Statistics. (C) Allison, Charles, Guillot, Koppel, Park, Parrado.
This course offers a basic introduction to the application/interpretation of statistical analysis in
sociology. Upon completion, you shoud be familiar with a variety of basic statistical techniques that
allow examination of interesting social questions. We begin by learning to describe the characteristics
of groups, followed by a discussion of how to examine and generalize about relationships between the
characteristics of groups. Emphasis is placed on the understanding/interpretation of statistics used to
describe and make generalizations about group characteristics. In addition to hand calculations, you
will also become familiar with using PCs to run statistical tests.

Page 5 of 26

SOCIOLOGY
(AS) {SOCI}
128. Introduction to Demographic Methods. (C) Elo, Hannum, Smith.
This course provides an introduction to basic demographic concepts, data, indicators, and techniques.
The course emphasizes hands-on applications of techniques in the analysis of population dynamics in
the U.S. and elsewhere. Students will learn about the main sources of demographic data, including
censuses,surveys, and vital statistics, and methods to estimate demographic processes (e.g. mortality,
fertility). Students will leave the course with a solid grounding in a) the sources and limitations of
demographic data; b) the construction of basic demographic indicators; and c) appropriate use of
basic demographic techniques to answer questions about human populations.
122. (GSWS122) The Sociology of Gender. (C) Society Sector. All classes. Leidner.
Gender is an organizing principle of society, shaping social structures, cultural understandings,
processes of interaction, and identities in ways that have profound consequences. It affects every
aspect of people's lives, from their intimate relationships to their participation in work, family,
government, and other social institutions and their place in the stratification system. Yet gender is such
a taken for granted basis for differences among people that it can be hard to see the underlying social
structures and cultural forces that reinforce or weaken the social boundaries that define gender.
Differences in behavior, power,and experience are often seen as the result of biological imperatives or
of individual choice. A sociological view of gender, in contrast, emphasizes how gender is socially
constructed and how structural constraints limit choice. This course examines how differences based
on gender are created and sustained, with particular attention to how other important bases of
personal identity and social inequality--race and class-interact with patterns of gender relations. We
will also seek to understand how social change happens and how gender inequality might be reduced.
125. Classical Sociological Theory. (C) Collins.
This course will cover the founding classics of the sociological tradition including works of Tocqueville,
Marx and Engels, Weber, Durkheim, Mauss, Simmel,and G.H.Mead. We will also examine how the
major traditions have continued and transformed into theories of conflict, domination, resistance and
social change; social solidarity, ritual and symbolism; symbolic interactionist and phenomenological
theory of discourse, self and mind. This course satisfies the theory requirement for sociology majors.
126. Contemporary Sociological Theory. (C) Collins.
This course will cover the founding classics of the sociological tradition including works of Tocqueville,
Marx and Engels, Nietzsche, Weber, Freud, Durkheim Simmel, and G.H. Mead. We will also examine
how the major traditionshave continued and transformed into theories of conflict, domination,
resistance and social change; social solidarity, ritual and symbolism; symbolic interactionist and
phenomenological theory of discourse, self and mind.
134. (NURS134) Health and Social Policy. (M) Society Sector. All classes. Aiken, Lake.
Health and Social Policy is an interdisciplinary course examining health care and social policy from
domestic and international perspectives. The course is designed to engage students in critical thinking
about social determinants of health, the organization and outcomes of health care systems and
institutions, global health priorities and challenges, and the implications for public policy. Topics include
the social inequalities and health; how organizational context of health care impacts outcomes;
management of human resources in health nationally and globally; analysis of medical error, its
causes, and consequences; review and critique of public policies in U.S. health care; and global health
priorities and international health policy. Issues of current public debate in health and health care will
provide a context for learning. There are no prerequisites. The course is intended for general lists as
well as for those planning careers in health care.

Page 6 of 26

SOCIOLOGY
(AS) {SOCI}
135. (AFRC135) Law and Society. (C) Bosk, Fetni.
After introducing students to the major theoretical concepts concerning law and society, significant
controversial societal issues that deal with law and the legal systems both domestically and
internationally will be examined. Class discussions will focus on issues involving civil liberties, the
organization of courts, legislatures, the legal profession and administrative agencies. Although the
focus will be on law in the United States, law and society in other countries of Africa, Asia, Europe and
Latin America will be covered in a comparative context. Readings included research reports, statutes
and cases.
L/R 137. The Sociology of Media and Popular Culture. (C) Society Sector. All classes. Grazian,
Wilde. Also fulfills General Requirement in Arts & Letters for Class of 2009 and prior
This course relies on a variety of sociological perspectives to examine the role of media and popular
culture in society, with a particular emphasis on the power of the mass media industry, the relationship
between cultural consumption and status, and the social organization of leisure activities from sports
to shopping. Specific course topics include the branding of Starbucks, the rising importance of
aesthetics and style in everyday life, and how young people use social media in the digital age.
SM 140. Social Conflict. (M) Collins.
Course will emphasize violent conflict, what leads up to it, and what determines whether it actually
happens or not. Micro-sociological observations of conflict and violence as it appears in real-life
observations, photos and videos. Topics include: fights and brawls; military combat; crowd and crowdcontrol violence; bullying and holdups; fair fights and dueling; carousing; sports violence; police
violence; gangs violence; terrorist and clandestine violence; school and workplace rampages. Also
considered will be ethnic cleansisng and genocide; women in violence; and multiple contexts of rape.
Escalation and de-escalation of conflict.
161. (STSC160) The History of the Information Age. (C) Humanities & Social Science Sector. Class
of 2010 & beyond. Staff.
Certain new technologies are greeted with claims that, for good or ill, they must transform our society.
The two most recent: the computer and the Internet. But the series of social, economic and
technological developments that underlie what is often called the Information Revolution include much
more than just the computer. In this course, we explore the history of information technology and its
role in contemporary society. We will explore both the technologies themselves--calculating machines,
punched card tabulators, telegraph and telephone networks, differential analyzers, digital computers,
and many others--and their larger social, economic and political contexts. To understand the roots of
these ideas we look at the prehistory of the computer, at the idea of the post-industrial or information
society, at parallels with earlier technologies and at broad historical currents in the United States and
the world.
143. Modern Social Movements. (M) Staff.
Throughout modern times groups of people have come together in an attempt to change their social
world. Their successes and failures teach us about society, organizations, and individuals. This course
will examine case studies of historical and contemporary social movements. Using these case studies,
this course will evaluate different approaches to understanding social movements, and investigate
what these different approaches suggest about individuals, the society in which they live, and the
potential for social change.

Page 7 of 26

SOCIOLOGY
(AS) {SOCI}
SM 152. (HSOC150) American Health Policy. (M) Linker.
This lecture course will introduce students to a broad range of topics that fall under the heading of
American health policy. Its main emphasis will be on the history of health care in America from the
U.S.Civil War to Obama care. The primary objective of the course will be to consider why the U.S., until
very recently, remained one of the only industrialized nations to have a private, non-nationalized health
care system. Some of the themes addressed include: private health insurance(such as Blue Cross/
Blue Shield), industrial health and workmen's compensation, the welfare state (in Europe, Canada,
and the U.S.), women's health, especially maternal and infant care programs, Medicare/Medicaid, the
Clinton Health Plan of 1993, injured soldiers and the Veterans Administration.
154. (LALS155) Afro-Latinos in the U.S.. Andino.
This coure will explore the arrival, establishment and contributions of free and enslaved Africans in
Ibero-America, the region presently known as Latin America, and the Spanish Speaking Caribbean. It
will look at how these actors and their descendants known today as Afro-Latinos, shaped and built the
foun- dations of Latin American society and culture throughout the centuries from colonial period to
present. The course will seek to understand Afro-Latinos' agency and negotiations as intellectual
contributors to the ideologies that led to independence and the creation of Latin American nations.
Likewise, the course will also explore the accomplishments, controversies and tensions in race d
ynamics and politics, gender relations, socio-economic issues, among others factors that took and
continue to take place as people of African descent negotiate their identity and struggle to uphold their
space in Latin America and the U.S.A. today.
162. ENVIRONMENTAL SOCIOLOGY.
163. EDUCATIONAL INEQUALITY.
175. (HSOC275) Medical Sociology. Society Sector. All classes. Schnittker.
This course will give the student an introduction to the sociological study of medicine. Medical
sociology is a broad field, covering topics as diverse as the institution and profession of medicine, the
practice of medical care, and the social factors that contribute to sickness and well-being. Although we
will not explore everything, we will attempt to cover as much of the field as possible through four
thematic units: (1) the organization and development of the profession of medicine, (2) the delivery of
health-care, especially doctor-patient interaction, (3) the social and cultural factors that affect how
illness is defined, and (4) the social causes of illness. The class will emphasize empirical research
especially but not only quantitative research.
200. (CRIM200) Criminal Justice. (C) Society Sector. All classes. MacDonald.
This course examines how the criminal justice system responds to crime in society. The course
reviews the historical development of criminal justice agencies in the United States and Europe and
the available scientific evidence on the effect these agencies have on controlling crime. The course
places an emphasis on the functional creation of criminal justice agencies and the discretionary role
decision makers in these agencies have in deciding how to enforce criminal laws and whom to punish.
Evidence on how society measures crime and the role that each major criminal justice agency plays in
controlling crime is examined from the perspective of crime victims, police, prosecutors, jurors, judges,
prison officials, probation officers and parole board members. Using the model of social policy
evaluation, the course asks students to consider how the results of criminal justice could be more
effectively delivered to reduce the social and economic costs of crime.

Page 8 of 26

SOCIOLOGY
(AS) {SOCI}
SM 221. Sample Survey Methods. (M) Hannum, Parrado.
This course provides an introduction to survey data collection. In meeting this objective, we examine
the major planning tasks necessary for conducting surveys, including problem formulation, study
design, questionnaire and interview design, pretesting, sampling, interviewer training and field
management, code development and coding of data, and data cleaning and management. We
critically explore the the design of surveys and collection of data from epistemological and ethical
perspectives. Students will leave the class with a solid understanding of the basic process of survey
data collection and a familiarity with its strengths and weaknesses as a method of inquiry into human
behavior.
238. (COMM203) Media Culture & Society in Contemporary China. (C) Yang.
This course studies contemporary Chinese media, culture, and society in the context of globalization.
Major topics include Internet expression and censorship, mass media commercialization,
entertainment media, middle class and consumerism, environmental degradation, new forms of
inequality, and civil society and popular protest. Taking a sociological approach, this course introduces
methods anad theories for analyzing media, institutions, inequality, and social change.
SM 222. Field Methods of Sociological Research. (M) Armenta, Bosk, Koppel, Lareau.
This course is designed to introduce students to field methods in sociological research, with a focus on
participant-observation and interviewing. During this course, students will read original research based
on field methods and discuss their strenghts, limitations, and ethical dilemmas. Most importantly,
students will design their own research projects and become ethnographers and interviewers.
Students will be guided through the fieldwork process from data collection to analysis, and will turn in
multiple assignments and and original research paper.
233. (CRIM100) Criminology. (C) Society Sector. All classes. Adler.
This introductory course examines the multi-disciplinary science of law-making, law-breaking, and lawenforcing. It reviews theories explaining where, when, by whom and against whom crimes happen.
Police, courts, prisons, and other institutions are also critically examined. This course meets the
general distribution requirement.
235. (AFRC235) Law and Social Change. (C) Fetni.
Beginning with discussion of various perspectives on social change and law, this course then
examines in detail the interdependent relationship between changes in legal and societal institutions.
Emphasis will be placed on (1) how and when law can be an instrument for social change, and (2) how
and when social change can cause legal change. In the assessment of this relationship, emphasis will
be on the laws of the United States. However, laws of other countries and international law relevant to
civil liberties, economic, social and political progress will be studied. Throughout the course,
discussions will include legal controversies relevanat to social change such as issues of race, gender
and the law. Other issues relevanat to State-Building and development will discussed. A comparative
framework will be used in the analysis of this interdependent relationship between law and social
change.
SM 239. (RELS201) Sociology of Religion. (M) Collins, Wilde.
Classic theory of religion in Durkheim and Weber, as well as contemporary theories of religious
movements. Topics include ritual, magic, and mystical experience; religious ethics and salvation
beliefs; the dynamics of cults, sects and mainstream churches; origins, expansion and decline of
religions; religions and social class; religions and politics. The spectrum of religions in the
contemporary United States will be examined, as well as historical comparisons.

Page 9 of 26

SOCIOLOGY
(AS) {SOCI}
L/R 252. (AFRC252) Human Rights. (C) Zuberi.
Sociology provides a unique way to look at human behavior and the world. We live in a world of
diverse and conflicting values in which human rights and respect for human dignity have provided a
platform for convergence. One important instance of such convergence has been the development of
international norms prohibiting genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and ethnic cleansing.
While there is agreement on fundeamental pricinples as reflected in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, differences in interpretation remain. A platform for convergence requires the
engagement of a number of constituencies, in particular, state and inter-state entities, corporations,
civil society and individuals, as well as the mutual reinforcement of their rights and duties. This course
will critically cover the history, practice and social significance of human rights.
SM 254. (URBS253) Cities, Suburbs, Regions. (M) Black.
This course will explore the political, economic, social, and demographic forces impacting
development patterns in metropolitan areas, with a particular focus on Philadelphia. We will examine
the government policies, economic forces, and social attitudes that affect the way a region grows, and
the impact of these forces on poverty, equity and segregation. Specific topics to be discussed include
the factors that make a region competitive, the city's changing role in the region, the impact place has
on opportunity, and approaches to revitalizing and improving communities.
259. (HSOC260) Social Determinants of Health. (M) Aronowitz.
Over the last century, we have witnessed dramatic historical change in populatiincidence and mortality,
e.g. rising numbers of women diagnosed with breast cancer and dramatic delines in death from
stomach cancer. There has also been a highly visible social patterning of health and disease, such as
socio-economic disparities in AIDS, substance abuse, and asthma in the U.S. today or the association
of breast cancer with affluence globally. This course will explore the way researchers, activists,
politicians and others in different eras have made sense of these changes and patterna and have
responded to them.
The course is historical and sociological. At the same time that we examine evidence and theories
about the way poverty, affluence, and other social factors influence individual and population health,
we will try to understand how social and historical forces have shaped how health and disease have
been understood and categorized. In examing our current obesity "epidemic," for example, we will not
only consider evidence and claims made about the causal role of market forces and changes in the
built environment, but ask why (besides the fact that we are heavier) obesity has become such a
visible and important medical and public health issue in the U.S. today.
SM 260. (STSC260) Cyberculture. (M) Staff.
Computers and the internet have beome critical parts of our lives and culture. In this course, we will
explore how people use these new technologies to develop new conceptions of identify, build virtual
communities and affect political change. Each week we'll see what we can learn by thinking about the
internet in a different way, focusing successively on hackers, virtuality, community, sovreignty,
interfaces, algorithms and infrastructure. We'll read books, articles, and blogs about historical and
contemporary cultures of computing, from Spacewar players and phone phreaks in the 1970s to
Google, Facebook, World of Warcraft, WikiLeaks, and Anonymous today. In addition, we'll explore
some of these online communities and projects ourselves and develop our own analyses of them.

Page 10 of 26

SOCIOLOGY
(AS) {SOCI}
SM 264. (URBS264) Poverty, Race and Health. (M) Elo.
This course is designed to introduce students to current literature on race/ethnic difference in health
and mortality in the United States, covering such topics as explanations for why some race/ethnic
groups fare better than others, how inner city poverty and residential segregation may contribute to
racial/ethnic differences in health outcomes, and health of immigrants versus native-born populations.
Current policy debated and recent policy developments related to health are also briely discussed. The
course is organized as a seminar with a combination of lectures and class discussions.
266. (LALS235) Latinos in United States. (C) Parrado.
This course presents a broad overview of the Latino population in the United States that focuses on
the economic and sociological aspects of Latino immigration and assimilation. Topics to be covered
include: construction of Latino identity, the history of U.S. Latino immigration, Latino family patterns
and household structure, Latino educational attainment. Latino incorporation into the U.S. labor force,
earnings and economic well-being among Latino-origin groups, assimilation and the second
generation. The course will stress the importance of understanding Latinos within the overall system of
race and ethnic relations in the U.S., as well as in comparison with previous immigration flows,
particularly from Europe. We will pay particular attention to the economic impact of Latio immigration
on both the U.S. receiving and Latin American sending communities, and the efficacy and future
possililities of U.S. immigration policy. Within all of these diverse topics, we will stress the
heterogeneity of the Latino population according to national origin groups (i.e. Mexican, Puerto Rican,
Cuban, and other Latinos), as well as generational differences between immigrants and the native
born.
SM 270. (URBS270) The Immigrant City. (M) Society Sector. All classes. Hanson, R. Scott.
Immigration is among the most important yet controversial forces shaping cities, regions, and
neighborhoods. The diversity of immigrant and receiving communities means that the dynamics and
impacts of migration are varied and complex. This course examines the development of immigrant and
receiving communities in the United States. It surveys public policy and community and ececonomic
development practices related to migration at the local, regional, national, and trans-national scale.
Class readings, discussions, and visits to Philadelphia's immigrant neighborhoods explore themes
including labor markets, housing experiences, political mobilization, civil society, cultural preservation,
and the built environment.
The first half of the course surveys migration and community formation among a broad range of
ethnic groups in different parts of the city and suburbs, mainly through history, sociology, and
geography; the second half focuses on specific policy and community and economic development
initiatives. Ultimately, the class aims to provide students with 1) a broad knowledge of immigration and
its impacts on cities and regions; 2) an in-depth understanding of urban policies and institutions
working on immigration in U.S. cities; and 3) familiarity with community and economic development
strategies for migrant and receiving communities.
275. (HSOC275) Medical Sociology. (C) Schnittker.
This course will give the student an introduction to the sociological study of medicine. Medical
sociology is a broad field, covering topics as diverse as the institution and profession of medicine, the
practice of medical care, and the social factors that contribute to sickness and well-being. Although we
will not explore everything, we will attempt to cover as much of the field as possible through four
thematic units: (1) the organization and development of the profession of medicine, (2) the delivery of
health-care, especially doctor-patient interaction, (3) the social and cultural factors that affect how
illness is defined, and (4) the social causes of illness. The class will emphasize empirical research
especially but not only quantitative research.

Page 11 of 26

SOCIOLOGY
(AS) {SOCI}
277. (HSOC277) Mental Illness. (C) Schnittker.
This course is designed to give a general overview of how sociologists study mental illness. We will be
concerned with describing the contributions of sociological research and exploring how these
contributions differ from those of psychology, psychiatry, and social work. This overview will be done in
three parts: we will discuss (i) what "mental illness" is, (ii) precisely how many Americans are mentally
ill, (iii) how social factors (e.g. race, gender, class) and social arrangements (e.g. social networks) lead
to mental illness, and (iv) how we as a society respond to and treat the mentally ill. Throughout the
course, we will be concerned with uncovering the assumptions behind difffent definitions of mental
health and exploring their political, social, and legal implications.
SM 300. Thesis Workshop. (C) Leidner.Prerequisite(s): SOCI 100.
The purpose of this course is to guide senior sociology majors in writing a research proposal for a
senior honors thesis. Students will learn about various research approaches, how to write a focused
literature review, and kinds of data necessary to answer a wide variety of research questions, including
their own. Throughout the course, students will work on designing a research question, generation
researchable hypotheses, and coming up with a design for their proposed study. The final paper for
this course will be a research proposal that is the basis for students' independent research project.
This course satisfies the research requirement for sociology majors and is designed primarily for
seniors who are planning to write an honors thesis.
280. (EALC048) Social Issues in Contemporary China. (C) Hannum.
China's transition to a market-oriented society has effected fundamental changes in the lives of
citizens. This class will consider pressing social concerns that China must struggle to address as it
continues down the path of market reforms. Using topical problems to illustrate broader issues of
social inequality along lines of gender, ethnicity, residence status, and poverty status, we will consider
questions such as the following: How are women and men faring differently in China's new labor
market and workplaces? Are rural peasants and the emerging underclass of urban laid-off workers
being left behind by market transition? How are minorities faring in China's transition? How does the
emerging digital divide play into the dichotomies of east-west and urban-rural in China? What is the
plight of millions of "floaters" migrating into China's cities, with minimal legal rights and protections?
Can China's rapidly-changing public health system handle emerging diseases such as SARS and
AIDS? How has the one-child policy affected women, children, and society in China? Who are the
"missing girls" of China, and what are the social implications of their disappearance? How was the
welfare of children and adolescents changed with market reforms? The class will combine lectures,
academic readings, case studies, films, and discussions.
SM 282. (STSC288) Knowledge and Social Structure. (C) Humanities & Social Science Sector.
Class of 2010 & beyond. Kuklick.
This course focuses on science in various institutional contexts and discusses situations ranging
widely over time and place. We consider examples drawn from the seventeenth century to the present,
the social settings in which science is found (e.g. the prince's court, the society of amateurs, the
university, the academic laboratory, industry and in the field, outdoors), and the effects of changes in
publishing and patronage. For comparative purposes, we also consider such phenomena as the
symphony orchestra, the art market, motion pictures, and literature. Assigned authors range from timehonored authorities, such as Robert Merton, to science writers for The New Yorker.
299. Independent Study. (C) Staff.
Directed readings and research in areas of sociology. Permission of instructor needed.

Page 12 of 26

SOCIOLOGY
(AS) {SOCI}
SM 322. (GSWS322) Advanced Topics in Gender and Sexuality Studies. Staff.
Violence against Women in Conflict: Sexuality, Terrorism, and Human Rights This course explores how
women's experiences of violence in conflict are guided by traditional patriarchal views of femininity,
and further how this violence impacts their human rights. Through academic texts, documents
produced by the U.N. and NGOs globally, and documentaries, we will consider women's experiences
of violence in contexts such as: how rape is used to decipher the borders and boundaries of emerging
nations, as in the 1994 genocide in Rwanda; the highly complex experiences of women suicide
bombers in the Israeli-Palestinian and Sri Lankan conflicts; the relationship between domestic violence
in the private/home space and the violence of war in the public space; and sexual violence against
women in the U.S. military.
330. (AFRC387, ITAL300) Special Topics. (M)
SM 340. (AFRC387) Special Topics AFRC Stud. (M)
SM 380. (CRIM280) Neighborhood Dynamics of Crime. (B) Loeffler.
Crime varies in time, space and populations as it reflects ecological structures and the routine social
interactions that occur in daily life. Concentrations of crime can be found among locations, with
antisocial activities like assaults and theft occurring at higher rates because of the demographic makeup of people (e.g. adolescents) or conflicts (e.g. competing gangs), for reasons examined by
ecological criminology. Variation in socio-demographic structures (age, education ratios, and the
concentration of poverty) and the physical environment (housing segregation, density of bars, street
lighting) predicts variations between neighborhoods in the level of crime and disorder. Both
ethnographic and quantitative research methods are used to explore the connections between the
social and physical environment of areas and antisocial behavior.
398. Senior Research. (C) Sociology Faculty.
Senior Research is for senior sociology majors only. Students are assigned Sociology advisors with
assistance from Undergraduate Chair.
399. Senior Thesis. (C) Sociology Faculty.
Senior Thesis is for senior sociology majors only. Students are assigned advisors with assistance from
Undergraduate Chair.
SM 430. (AFRC431, AFRC630, COMM496, SOCI630, URBS403) Advanced Topics in Sociology.
(M) Staff.
Upper level advance topics vary from semester to semester.
SM 410. (CRIM410) Research Seminar in Experiments in Crime and Justice. (C) Loeffler.
This seminar focuses on examining data from experiments in criminology including: randomized
controlled trials of criminal justice policies, "natural" experiments in crime, and other quasiexperimental studies. A series of experiments conducted by Penn scholars and elsewhere will be
examined. This seminar also guides criminology majors in writing a research proposal for their thesis.
Students will learn about how to formulate a research question, develop a review of the literature, and
how to apply necessary empirical methods. The final paper for this course will be a research proposal
that can serve as the basis for the student's senior thesis and to satisfy the senior capstone
requirement. Readings will come from the disciplines of criminology, sociology, psychology,
economics, and urban planning.

Page 13 of 26

SOCIOLOGY
(AS) {SOCI}
SM 411. (CRIM411) Field Observations in Criminal Courts. (C) Staff.
The course will serve as an introduction both to qualitative research and to an understanding of the
routine workings of the courts in Philadelphia. After a brief discussion of the theoretical underpinnings
and practical techniques of ethnography, students will undertake supervised field projects leading to
the writing of 5000 words long, examined research reports about different aspects of the social
organization of the courthouse and court room.
SM 420. (URBS420) Perspectives on Urban Poverty. (C) Fairbanks.
This course provides an interdisciplinary introduction to 20th century urban poverty, and 20th century
urban poverty knowledge. In addition to providing an historical overview of American poverty, the
course is primarily concerned with the ways in which historical, cultural, political, racial, social, spatial/
geographical, and economic forces have either shaped or been left out of contemporary debates on
urban poverty. Of great importance, the course will evaluate competing analytic trends in the social
sciences and their respective implications in terms of the question of what can be known about urban
poverty in the contexts of social policy and practice, academic research, and the broader social
imaginary. We will critically analyze a wide body of literature that theorizes and explains urban poverty.
Course readings span the disciplines of sociology, anthropology, urban studies, history, and social
welfare. Primacy will be granted to critical analysis and deconstruction of course texts, particularly with
regard to the ways in which poverty knowledge creates, sustains, and constricts meaningful channels
of action in urban poverty policy and practice interventions.
SM 431. (HIST233) Modern Mexican Society. (M) Staff.
An introduction to social, political, and economic organization of modern Mexico. This course traces to
evolution of Mexico's fundamental societal institutions from their birth during the Mexican Revolution of
1910, through their flowering during the 1950's and 1960's, to recent changes under neoliberal
administrations. The course ends with a discussion of Mexico's transition to democracy and the
election of the first opposition President in 80 years.
SM 435. (URBS457) Globalization & The City. (C) Chattaraj.
Over the past two decades, the public imagination has been gripped by the concept of globalization.
Scholars, corporations, advertisers and government officials have latched onto this idea as a defining
feature of our current era. These various constituencies use globalization not only to account for
epochal shifts in our economy and society, but also to justify new types of business strategy and public
policy. This course will examine three interlinked dimensions of globalization: Global economic
processes (e.g. the transnational operations of multinational firms that have given rise to a new
international division of labor); cultural globalization (e.g. the spread of American brands like Coca
Cola, Nike and Hollywood films), and political globalization (e.g. the rise of supranational organizations
like the IMF, World Bank and WTO that promote the idea of free markets).
Moreover, we will study globalization in the context of cities because, given their centrality to
globalization processes, it is in cities that we can best understand how globalization takes place. In
cities, we can study the global economic processes that restructure urban space, giving rise to new
financial districts, international art exhibits and post-modern architecture and entrepreneurial
strategies that seek to elevate cities to world city status. The course will examine these processes in a
comparative light, contrasting urban globalization processes in Europe and North America with those
in Latin America, Asia and Africa.

Page 14 of 26

SOCIOLOGY
(AS) {SOCI}
SM 436. (URBS426) Culture, Arts and Media in Urban Context. (M) Grazian.
The purpose of this academic-based service learning course is to examine the development of art,
culture and media in cities, with an emphasis on how cultural organizations operate in the urban
environment. Through classroom readings and discussions, students will explore a variety of
sociological approaches to the analysis of urban culture and the creative economy, local arts and
entertainment, new media technology and public policy. In addition, students will conduct several
hours per week of community service in one of a variety of local nonprofit arts and other cultural
institutions in Philadelphia.
SM 460. (AFRC420, AFRC620, SOCI660) Advanced Topics in Africana Studies. (M) Staff.
Advanced Topics in Africana Studies: The Sociology of W E B Du Bois; GIS for Social Science
Research
SM 438. (URBS438) SOCIAL SCIENCE STUDIO: IMMIGRANTS MAKE THE CITY. (M) Choudhury,
Kushanava.
How do American cities grow? Studies of urban transformation have focused on anchor institutions,
the growth model of big business-generated employment, and "creative class" gentrification. After
decades of decline, many major cities like Philadelphia are seeing gains in population again, as well
as new commercial activity and street life, spurred by the influx of new immigrant communities. Yet few
scholars have asked: What role do immigrants play in the current revival of the American metropolis?
In this Social Science Studio course, 16 students will work collaboratively as in a design studio to
conduct research that can answer this important social-scientific question. Students will work on
independent projects that engage multiple methods and fields to produce new types of knowledge.
They will be introduced to multiple methods drawn from architecture, planning, anthropology and
political science, including mapping, interviewing, fieldnotesnotes, socio-economic surveys, sketching,
photography and web design to develop independent projects. No prior knowledge is required but
students with experience in GIS, STATA, photography, drawing or web design are encouraged to apply.
450. (HIST455, PPE 475) ONLINE TOPICS. (C)
SM 453. (URBS453) Metropolitan Growth and Poverty. (C) Madden.
This course analyzes the role of metropolitan regions in the U.S. and global economies, including the
sources of metropolitan productivity, the ways that metropolitan structures affect residents, and
analyses of public policy in metropolitan areas. The economic, political, and social forces that have
shaped World War II urban and regional development are explored, including technology, demography,
and government. Special attention is paid to how metropolitan change affects residents by income and
race. Topics include: gentrification, schools, suburbanization, sprawl, metropolitan fragmentation,
concentration of poverty, race, and various economic revitalization initiatives.
SM 473. (URBS473) Community Organizing: History and Theory. (M) Becker.
Power is an ability to create change. Without access to power that might otherwise come from political,
financial or personal networks, community organizing can often serve as the only viable source of
power for the oppressed. Although organizing became a partisan buzzword during the 2008
presidential campaign, it is firmly rooted in the democtratic tradition. Organizing campaings have
played a central role in US history, most notably as the foundation of the Civil Rights movement. This
course will integrate the history and theories of community organizing so that each student will have
the foundation to develop a transformational praxis to create change in their own communities.
Focused analysis of the course material, case study reviews, guest speaker presentations, inquirybased assessments and problem-posing methods rooted in the student's own context will serve as the
primary means of development.

Page 15 of 26

SOCIOLOGY
(AS) {SOCI}
SM 488. (GSWS488) Culture, Sexuality and Global Health. (A) Fiereck.
What, if anything, is global in"global health"? Whatever this field might be, it is more often than not
actively produced through a range of conflicting ethical commitments of multiple expert cultures, social
movements and laypersons. This course explores critical themes in the historical and sociocultural
study of global health. Students will engage a number of disciplinary perspectives within the social
sciences including the history, sociology, and anthropology of science, and we will pay particular
attention to feminist, queer, and postcolonial science studies perspectives. Throughout, we will
consider how both global and local cultural transformations have shaped the emergence of this
multidisciplinary field of study. To understand the complexity of global health, students will engage with
a number of theoretical and ethnographic texts while questioning its stability and coherence as a selfsame object given its interdisciplinary character. In doing so, we will explore the ways in which diverse
sets of interests converge to constitute as well as contest the ever-shifting boundaries of global health.
SM 524. (DEMG524) Advanced Topics in the Sociology of the Family. (M) Staff.
The course will review a series of theoretical issues in the sociology of the family and examine major
empirical studies in which theoretical advances have been made. Special attention will be given to
work that has a historical and comparative perspective. Opportunities will be provided for original
research on the family.
SM 530. (AFRC533, LALS530) Advanced Selected Topics. (C) Staff.
Topics vary from semester to semester. Courses offered in the past were Social Movements and
Social Change; Critical Race Theory; Conducting Family Research; Mistakes, Errors, Accidents and
Disasters; Sociology of Jewish Bioethics.
L/R 535. (DEMG535) Quantitative Methods in Sociology I. (A) Allison, Smith.Prerequisite(s): Basic
algebra.
This course is an introduction to the practice of statistics in social and behavioral sciences. It is open
to beginning graduate students and--with the permission of the instructor--advanced undergraduates.
Topics covered include the description of social science data, in graphical and non-graphical form;
correlation and other forms of association, including cross-tabulation; bivariate regression; an
introduction to probability theory; the logic of sampling; the logic of statistical inference and
significance tests. There is a lecture twice weekly and a mandatory "lab."
L/R 536. (DEMG536) Quantitative Methods in Sociology II. (B) Allison, Kohler, Park, Schnittker,
Smith.Prerequisite(s): SOCI 535 or permission of instructor.
As the second part of a two-semester sequence, this graduate course focuses on regression analysis
as used in social science research. In particular, we discuss features and assumptions of linear
regression and logistic regression models. We learn how to apply regression models to real social
science data using Stata and how to interpret the results.
SM 550. (DEMG550) Social Inequality. (M) Jacobs.
This course will study social stratification primarily in contemporary societies. We will examine both the
distribution of social rewards as well as process for the allocation of these rewards. Stratification
theory and research on social mobility will be considered. Topics include the influence of education,
race and gender, and structural and organizational factors on individual success. Acquaintance with
stratification theory and quantitative methods would be helpful but not required.

Page 16 of 26

SOCIOLOGY
(AS) {SOCI}
SM 541. (DEMG541, GSWS532) Gender, the Labor Force, and Markets. (M) Madden.
Drawing from sociology, economics and demography, this course examines the causes and effects of
gender differences in labor force participation, earnings and occupation in the United States and in the
rest of the developed and developing world. Differences by race, ethnicity and sexual preference are
also considered. Theories of labor supply, marriage, human captial and discrimination are explored as
explanations for the observed trends. Finally, the course reviews current labor market policies and
uses the theories of labor supply, marriage, human capital and discrimination to evaluate their effects
on women and men.
SM 542. (GSWS542) Work and Gender. (M) Leidner.
This seminar examines the relevance of gender to the organization and experience of paid and unpaid
work. Combining materialist and social constructionist approaches, we will consider occupational
segregation, the relation of work and family, gender and class solidarity, the construction of gender
through work, race and class variation in work experiences, and related topics.
SM 546. (GSWS546) Feminist Theory. (M) Leidner.
Feminist activists and academics have posed fundamental challenges to existing approaches to social
theory. This seminar explores the development of feminist theory since the 1960s, focusing on
approaches that have the most relevance for social science. The relations among feminist theorizing,
research, and activism will be emphasized.
SM 553. (URBS553) Field Methods in Qualitative Research. (C) Bosk, Grazian, Lareau.
This course is designed to introduce graduate students to basic skills and concepts in ethnographic
field research, including participant observation, interviewing, field documentation, and the scholarly
presentation of qualitative data. Students will learn to apply these skills and concepts through an
assigned set of exercises in concert with a semester-long project based on intensive fieldwork at a
research site of their choosing. In addition, we will examine exemplars of published fieldwork in both
classical and contemporary sociology.
SM 555. Pro-Seminar in Sociological Research. (A) Hannum, Jacob, Kao, Leidner, Smith.
In the non-credit seminar students will be introduce to key areas in sociologicalresearch, and a set of
prodessional skills necessary to navigate graduate school and a successful academic career.
Students will also be introduced to faculty and resources available at Penn. This course is required for
all first-year graduate students in Sociology
SM 556. Pro-Seminar in Sociological Research II. (C) Collins, Grazian, Hannum, Park, Schnittker,
Smith, Wilde.
This graduate seminar for first-year graduate students will be a two-semester course covering the
major subfields of sociology -- their classical and contemporary theories, current methods and
substance.

Page 17 of 26

SOCIOLOGY
(AS) {SOCI}
SM 561. (COML562) Class Cultures and Historical Change. (M) Collins.
Culture as lifestyle, therefore as the immediately visible aspect of social class, as well as the status
groups that may cut across class. Examines micro-sociological evidence (including photos and other
images; and literary and other textual sources) of how class and status are performed in everyday life.
Goffmanian and subsequent theory of interaction rituals applied across long-term historical changes,
and their causes. Topics include Norbert Elias's theory of civilizing process; stratification in patrimonial/
aristocratic societies; the modern shift to bureaucracy plus private households; the effects of
democratization, social movements, wars, revolutions, and status leveling; informalization and
antinomian counter-cultures; youth cultures and cults of mass entertainment. Concluding with what
electronic communications are doing to the future of class cultures and self-presentation.
SM 570. (AFRC571) VISUALIZING W. E. B. DUBOIS. (M) Zuberi.
This seminar will focus on a project that views history as a result of our contemporary society in witch
biographical truths are constantly shifting. So the historical biographers write about the way they
remembered and visualize the past, and not about the way that it happened. We will take Du Bois's
biography in his own words and interrogate his narrative with the visual narratives of his life and
influence produced by others. "Visualizing W.E.B Du Bois" focuses on photographic, film, and video
representations intended to present some aspect of Du Bois's reality, primarily for the purposes of
instruction or maintaining a historical record. Such projects include photos, materials originally shot on
film stock, and digital images that can be either displayed in a book or magazine, and moving images
made into a film or video for a TV show or released for screening in cinemas, or other broadcast
mediums like YouTube and Vimeo.
572. Health Care and Social Policy. (M) Aiken.
This course is an area study or survey of social policy issues in contemporary health care. Topics
include social contexts of health care and health policy; the organization and financing of health
services; the health professions; health and illness over the life cycle; achieving equitable access to
health services; the interface between health and social services. Health problems of national
significance will be addressed including infant mortality, teenage pregnancy, AIDS, the chronically
mentally ill and homeless, and health impaired elderly.
SM 601. Contemporary Social Theory. (M) Collins.
This is a graduate-level seminar structured around the main theoretical debates of contemporary
sociology, including the interplay of rationality and emotion, the relationship between structure and
agency, the nature of power, and the role of chance and contingency. In condisering alternative
positions on these debates, we will encounter the major theorists of the past fifty years, including
Parsons, Merton, Goffman, Homans, Schutz, Coleman, Bourdiew, Luhmann, Habermas, Collins, and
Giddens. Requirements include intensive primary source reading, writing, and participation. The
course assumes, and does not provide, prior familiarity with the main theoretical perspectives, and
thus does not substitute for the undergraduate theory course (Soci 126)
SM 595. (AFRC595) Media, Culture, and Society. (M) Staff.
This course will begin by surveying approaches to culture that are characteristic of general theory in
sociology. We will then deal in depth with theories of recorded culture that have developed within the
sociology of culture and related disciplines, including the role of the media in constructing social
reality, the interpretation and reception of texts, recorded culture and the creation of symbolic
boundries, the social construction of art, the organization of cultural industries, sacred symbols and
political integration, and the relationship between culture and the state.

Page 18 of 26

SOCIOLOGY
(AS) {SOCI}
SM 596. (ASAM590, SOCI496) Sociology of Education. (M) Kao.
This graduate seminar will introduce students to some of the key theoretical and empirical work in the
sociology of education. We will examine how schools work to maintain or alleviate inequality, and focus
on differences in eductational acheivement and attainment by race, ethnicity, immigrant status, class,
and gender. We will review work on the educational experiences of youth from early childhood to
young adulthood.
SM 597. MLA Proseminar.
SM 602. (COML610) Proseminar in Classical Sociology. (C) Collins.
This course will cover the founding classics of the sociological tradition including works of Tocqueville,
Marx and Engels, Nietzsche, Weber, Freud, Durkheim Simmel, and G.H.Mead. We will also examine
how the major traditions have continued and transformed into theories of conflict, domination,
resistance and social change; social solidarity, ritual and symbolism; symbolic interactioist and
phenomenologic theory of discourse, self and mind.
SM 603. (DEMG707) Master's Research in Sociology. (C) Bosk, Grazian, Jacobs, Kao, Lareau,
Leidner, Park, Schnittker.
This graduate course is intended to be helpful to students as they produce an MA thesis. The course is
structured to provide social support and feedback as students move through the stages in the
development of a project (i.e. data analysis, review of the literature, development of a thesis, and
revision). Students should begin the semester with a data set in hand; additional data analysis will
occur during the term. (In some cases, students may be finishing their data collection.) In addition, the
course is intended to provided professional development opportunities for students by providing
"insider" information about the publication process. Students will be given examples of journal review
(including reviews that reject a paper), copies of papers as they move through the revision process,
and guidelines for producing a publishable piece of work The goal is for students to produce a
manuscript that can be submitted for publication in the near future. This is a required course for
second year gradate students in Sociology.
604. (DEMG604) Methodology of Social Research. (C) Harknett, Smith, Wilde, Zuberi.
This course will give students familiarity with the common research methods social scientists use to
conduct research. Ethnographic, interview, survey, experimental and historical/comparative research
methods will be covered. Four themes will be explored: 1) the basics of solid research design, 2) the
various advantages and disadvantages of each method, 3) when the use of a method is appropriate or
inappropriate for the research question, and 4) how to evaluate researchers' claims on the basis of the
evidence they present. These themes will be explored by reading examples of and conducting
exercises designed to give students hands-on experience in each of the methods. Students will
conduct the exercises on a topic of their choice, which together will culminate in their final paper. The
course is required and restricted to second year students in sociology and demography.
607. (DEMG607) Introduction to Demography. (M) Staff.
A nontechnical introduction to fertility, mortality and migration and the interrelations of population with
other social and economic factors.

Page 19 of 26

SOCIOLOGY
(AS) {SOCI}
609. (DEMG609) Basic Methods of Demography. (C) Elo, Guillot, Smith.
The course is designed to introduce students to basic concepts of demographic measurement and
modeling used to study changes in population size and composition. The course covers basic
measures of mortality, fertility and migration; life table construction; multiple decrement life tables;
stable populations; population projections; and age patterns of vital events. Students will learn to apply
demographic methods through a series of weekly problem sets.
611. (DEMG611) Structural Equation Models. (M) Allison.
Statistical modeling with multiple equations and latent variables. The first part of the course will focus
on linear models that could be estimated with any of the well-known SEM programs (e.g., LISREL,
EQS, or Amos). Both Mplus and SAS will be used exclusively in this part of the course. The second
part will focus on Mplus models for variables that are categorical, count, or censored. Maximum
likelihood methods for missing data will also be covered.
SM 620. Doctoral Seminar in Sociological Research II. (C) Grazian, Hannum, Jacobs, Schnittker,
Wilde.Prerequisite(s): Third year graduate students.
This course is intended to aid in the selection, framing, writing and revising of sociological dissertation
proposals. It is also intended to provide a forum for the presentation of dissertation research in
progress. The goal is to provide a forum for the acquisition of professional socialization in sociology.
We will discuss the framing of research questions, the design of research strategies, and the writing of
dissertation proposals. We will discuss the process of submitting manuscripts for conferences and
journals, preparing a curriculum vitae, job search strategies, and preparing for effective colloquium
presentations. We will also review articles currently under review at the American Sociological Review.
It is expected that third year graduate students in Sociology will enroll in this class.
612. (DEMG612) Categorical Data Analysis. (M) Allison, Smith.
This course deals with techniques for analyzing multivariate data which the dependent variable is a set
of categories (a dichotomy or polytomy). Topics will include linear probability models, logit (logistic)
regression models, probit models, logit analysis of contingency tables, cumulative logit and probit (for
ordinal data), multinomial logit, conditional logit (discrete choice), unobserved heterogeneity, log-linear
models, square tables, response-based sampling, and repeated measures. Methods will be illustrated
using the Stata System. There will be several assignments using Stata to analyzedata provided by the
instructor.
613. (DEMG613) Event History. (M) Allison.Prerequisite(s): SOCI 536 or equivalent.
An applications-oriented course on statistical methods for the analysis of longitudinal data on the
occurrence of events, also known as survival analysis, failure-time analysis, hazard analysis or
duration analysis. Emphasis on regression-like models in which the risk of event occurrence is a
function of a set of explanatory variables. Topics include accelerated failure-time models, hazard
models, censoring, Cox regression models, time-dependent covariates, completing risks, repeated
events, unobserved heterogeneity, discrete-time methods.
SM 617. (AFRC617) Theories of Racial and Ethnic Differentiation. (M) Charles.
This course provides an overview of prominent theories and theorists of race and ethnicity, and is
concerned with: 1) Understanding the nature and persistence of race and ethnicity as meaningful
social groupings in contemporary American society, and 2) Explaining the social significance of these
group identities--that is, how these groupings are related to social stratification, to socio-cultural
relations, and to the political and economic dynamics in our society.

Page 20 of 26

SOCIOLOGY
(AS) {SOCI}
621. (DEMG621) Mortality. (M) Elo, Kohler.
The course focuses on the description and explanation of health and mortality in human populations
and their variability across several dimensions such as age, time, place, social class, race, etc. The
course includes general theories of health, mortality and morbidity, investigations of mortality and
related processes in developing and developed countries, and discussions of future mortality trends
and their implications for individual lives and the society at large.
SM 622. (DEMG622) Fertility. (M) Kohler, Smith.
The biological, social and demographic factors explaining the levels, trends and differentials in human
fertility. Data, measures, and methods used in the context of the more and the less developed
countries, with an emphasis on the historical and current course of the fertitlity transition.
SM 623. (AFRC623, URBS623) Workshop in Urban Ethnography. (M) Staff.
The ethnographic and sociological interpretation of urban life. Conceptual and methodological issues
will be thoroughly discussed. Ongoing projects of participants will be presented in a "workshop"
format, thus providing participants the opportunity of learning from and contributing ethnographic work
in progress. Selected ethnographic works will be read and assessed.
SM 630. (AFRC431, AFRC630, DEMG630, SOCI430) Advanced Special Topics. (C) Staff.
Topics vary from semester to semester. Course titles include: Race, Colonialism & Methods; Mistakes,
Errors, Accidents & Disasters, Graduate Research Practicum, Sociology of Violence: Gangs &
Organized Crime.
SM 633. (DEMG633) Population Processes I. (A) Elo, Guillot, Parrado, Schnittker.
This is one of two courses that serve as an introduction to core areas of demography and important
developments in the field. Population Processes I introduces students to broad set of issues in health,
mortality, and aging. Readings cover overviews of major topics as well as recent approaches to the
subject. Attention is focused on description and explanation of variation in health across time, space
and social groups. One consequence of mortality decline is population aging. We will cover some of its
implications for individuals, families and societies.
SM 634. (DEMG634) Population Processes II. (B) Flippen, Harknett, Kohler, Parrado, Smith.
Population Processes II is part of a two-course sequence designed to introduce students to the core
areas of demography (fertility, mortality, and migration) and recent developments in the field. PP II is
divided into two parts. The first focuses on family demography and the biological, social and
demographic factors explaining levels, trends, and differentials in human fertility transition with an
emphasis on the historical and current course of fertility transition in developed and developing
countries. The second part of the course provides a comprehensive review of theories and research
on international migration. Readings examine patterns and processes of global migration during the
classic age from 1800-1914 as well as during the postwar period from 1945 to the present. The course
also covers a history and evaluation of immigration policies around the world, and devotes significant
attention to theoretical and empirical perspectives on immigrant adaptation, including the relationship
between gender and migration.

Page 21 of 26

SOCIOLOGY
(AS) {SOCI}
SM 649. A Course on Elites. Lareau.
Most of the studies of inequality look at poverty and the impact of poverty. This course will be a study
of those at the top of the social stratification system. We will take a broad vision of elites of to include
the upper-middle-class as well as those in the top 1%. The course will examine the concentration of
wealth in American society. It will examine elite families. It will also look at elite education. There will be
a unit on the financial industry, the 2008 debacle, and the failure of the government to regulate this
important industry. We will also study the influence of race by comparing the black upper-middle-class
with white upper-middle-class families.Thus, we will also look at the power of elites in a number of
spheres. Finally, we will also read theoretical perspectives including the work of C. Wright Molls, Marx,
and Bourdieu. Thus, in addition to the focus on social stratification, this course cuts across sociology of
the family, economic sociology, cultural sociology, and race and ethnic relations.
640. (NURS640) Global Health and Health Policy. (M) Aiken.
This participatory interdisciplinary seminar course examines contemporary issues in public health
policy and global health. The organizing framework is social determinants of health. We consider
evidence that inequalities in education, income, and occupation influence health status, and the policy
dilemma that broad interventions to improve population health may increase health disparities. We
critically examine whether prevention is always better than cure, and what modern medicine has to
offer in terms of health. We explore the public policy process in health using the "tobacco wars" as a
case example, of how politics, policy, law, commercial interests, and research intersect to affect the
public's health. We examine whether global health is in a state of decline, and the extent to which
failures in public health, public policy, and foreign policy have contributed to increasing threats to world
health. Likewise we will examine the potential for greater integration of health into foreign policy to
create global infrastructure upon which to advance health. We will examine the global health workforce
and the impact of widespread global migration of health professionals on receiving and sending
countries.
There are no prerequisites. The course is designed for graduate students in the social and
behavioral sciences, health professions, public health, business and law. Advanced undergraduate
students will be admitted with permission.
643. (DEMG643) Social Stratification. (M) Jacobs, Park.
This is an advanced level graduate seminar where we will review contemporary research on social
stratification and mobility. We will examine empirical and theoretical studies not only in the US but also
in other countries to address how the pattern of social stratification varies across societies and over
time. The main topics to be discussed are social mobility, occupational attainment, educational
inequality, gender and race, and family processes and stratification. We will also examine studies that
address how national contexts mediate social stratification. Advanced undergraduate students will be
admitted with permission.
644. (BIOE604) Empirical Methods in Bioethics. (M) Bosk.
This course provides an introduction to social science research design and methods for students
interested in conducting research on issues in biothics. The course is appropriate for students who,
rather than conducting research themselves, will use research findings to make or challenge
arguments in policy statements or other writings. Emphasis is placed on the logic of research design
as the way to relate topic of inquiry with methods so that evidence produced is pertinent and useful.
Students will design research projects and explore a variety of methods available to conduct research.
Students will also integrate research ethics into the formulation and design of their inquiries.

Page 22 of 26

SOCIOLOGY
(AS) {SOCI}
SM 650. Social Inequality. (M) Jacobs.
This course will study social inequality primarily in contemporary societies. We will examine both the
distribution of social rewards as well as processes for the allocation of these rewards. Stratification
theory and research on social mobility will be considered. Topics include the influence of education,
race and gender, and structural and organizational factors on individual success. We will also discuss
how societies' stratification systems vary across time and place. Acquaintance with stratification theory
and quantitative methods would be helpful but not required.
SM 660. (AFRC420, AFRC620, SOCI460) Advanced Topics in Africana Studies. (C) Staff.
Advanced Topics in Africana Studies: The Sociology of W E B Du Bois; GIS for Social Science
Research
662. (DEMG662) PANEL DATA ANALYSIS.
SM 664. (COMM665) DIGITAL MEDIA & SOC THEO. (C)
This seminar explores critical issues in contemporary society through the lens of digital media studies
and social theory. Special attention will be given to how social theory may inform the theorizing and
empirical analysis of digital culture, digital politics, and digital practices. We will read recent
monographs on the meanings and uses of digital media in international development, international
migration, state power and popular protest, symbolic violence, and the formation and contestation of
identities, communities, and publics. These works will be examined alongside the social theories of
Jeffrey Alexander, Ulrich Beck, Bourdieu, Judith Butler, Foucault, Giddens, Goffman, Habermas,
Melucci, Victor Turner, and others. A term paper required
SM 667. Social Interaction. (M) Collins.
The dynamics of interpersonal interaction, especially in face-to-face encounters during limited short
periods of time. Topics include: the theory ofinteraction rituals deriving from Durkheim, Goffman and
their contemporary followers; conversation analysis; micro-ethnographic studies of non-verbal behavior
and embodied interaction; sociology of emotions; symbolic interactionist theory and the social nature
of mind, self, and inner dialogue; electronically mediated interaction and its effects on social ties; and
the relationship between micro and macro sociology.
SM 681. (CRIM601) Pro-seminar in Criminal Justice. (C) MacDonald.
A wide-ranging introduction to theory and research on responses to crime under the rubric of criminal
law. Theories of deterrence, procedural justice, reintegratigve shaming, defiance and other interactions
between legal sanctions and legal conduct will be examined in light of the most recent research.
Issues of discrimination, disparity, and fairness in the operation of criminal law will be considered with
evidence from around the world. Patterns, causes, and consequences of legal sanctioning patterns will
be systematically documenteed, and major gaps in knowledge will be identified.

Page 23 of 26

SOCIOLOGY
(AS) {SOCI}
SM 670. (DEMG670) Family Data. (C) Harknett.
This two semester course will engage each graduate student in an analysis project with qualitative and
quantitative components, using a linked qualitative longitudinal data set. Students will use survey data
from the baseline and 12 month wave of the Fragile Families study (described at http://
crcw.princeton.edu/fragilefamilies/), a national survey of unwed and married parents who have just had
a child (with unmarried parents over sampled) They will also use transcripts and coded data from the
TLC3 study, which involved qualitative couple and individual interviews conducted with a subset of 75
of the couples in the FF survey in 3 waves: about 3 months after the birth and then again 12 and 24
months after the birth. Most of these are low-income, unmarried, cohabiting parents. The goal of the
course is for each student to use these two data sets, and the analytic techniques and literature
covered in the course, to write a paper that can be submitted for publication. The spring will also
include lots of tips on how to construct a publishable paper. Students should only enroll in this course if
they plan to take the spring sequel course as well.
SM 677. (DEMG677) International Migration. (M) Flippen.
A comprehensive review of theories and research on international migration. The course introduces
the basic precepts of neoclassical economics, the new economics of labor migration, segmented labor
market theory, world systems theory, social capital theory and the theory of cumulative causation.
Readings examine patterns and processes of global migration during the classic age from 18001914
as well as during the postwar period from 1945 to the present. The course also covers a history and
evaluation of immigration policies around the world, and devotes signification attention to theoretical
and empirical perspectives on immigrant adaptation. Within this larger topic, we will also discuss
internal migration and urbanization; the relationship between gender and migration; the spatial
distribution of immigrants within the United States, immigrant communities, and ethnic enclaves; and
the undocumented population in the United States.
SM 680. (CRIM600) Pro seminar in Criminology. (C) Staff.
This course explores the basic scope, mission and methods of the science of criminology. The course
proceeds to cover the current state of theory, research, and accomplishments in both knowledge and
policy about criminality and criminal events. Students will read widely and report to the seminar on
their readings, as well as assessing key readings and central ideas for their potential guidance of
future research. The course focuses primarily on criminology of criminal events, including law-making
and law-breaking. The criminology of reactions to crime is covered in the second semester proseminar in criminal justice, CRIM 601/SOCI 681.
SM 685. Sociology of Violence. (C) Collins.
General theory of social conflict, with an emphasis on violent conflict. Specific applications include
fights, riots, combat, and gang violence; tribal and modern war; abuse of the weak' domestic conflict;
sexual conflict and rape; homicide; social movements and moral crusades; conflict management and
social control; state breakdowns and revolutions; ethnic conflict and genocide.
SM 690. (DEMG707, DEMG708, SOCI691) Sociology Writing Workshop I. Jacobs, Lareau.
SM 691. (DEMG707, DEMG708, SOCI690, SOCI707, SOCI708) Sociology Writing Workshop II.
Jacobs, Lareau.

Page 24 of 26

SOCIOLOGY
(AS) {SOCI}
SM 702. (AFRC702, AFRC710, AFST702, ENGL572, LALS702) Political Economy Social History
of Africa/African Diaspora. (M) Zuberi.
The topic of this course will be Africa and the African Diaspora. The emphasis will be on readings,
class discussions, and seminars to reflect the ongoing discussions in the field. We will provide a series
of readings for background to each section.
SM 707. (DEMG707) Second-Year Research Seminar I. (C) Staff.
This course is intended to hone the skills and judgment in order to conduct independent research in
sociology and demography. We will discuss the selection of intellectually strategic research questions
and practical research designs. Students will get experience with proposal writing, the process of
editing successive drafts of manuscripts, and the oral presentation of work in progress as well as
finished research projects. The course is designed to be the context in which master's papers and
second year research papers are written. This is a required course for second year graduate students
in Demography. Others interested in enrolling in only one of the courses may do so with the
permission of the Chair of the Graduate Group in Demography.
SM 731. (DEMG731) Advanced Demographic Methods. (M) Smith.Prerequisite(s): DEMG 609 and
SOCI 536 (or its equivalent).
This course considers a variety of procedures for measuring and modeling demographic processes.
We will consider both deterministic (drawn from classic demographic methods, stable population
theory, and the like) and stochastic (drawn from statistics) perspectives and methods, including their
integration. Pre-requisites: DEMG 609 and SOCI 536 (or its equivalent).
SM 777. (AFRC777, DEMG777) Special Topics in Demography. (M) Staff.
Topics vary from semester to semester.
796. (DEMG796, ECON791) Demographic, Economic, and Social Interrelations. (M) Madden,
Kohler.
The course investigates economic and social determinants of fertility, mortality, and migration, and it
discusses the effects of population variables on economic and social conditions, including economic
and social development. Topics discussed in the course include: How do economic changes affect
marriage, divorce, and child bearing decisions? How do households make decisions about transfers
and requests? How can economic and sociological approaches be combined in explanatory models of
demography change? How does immigration to the US affect the ethnic composition of the population,
the earnings of native workers, taxes on natives, and the macro-economy? What causes the aging of
populations, and how will population aging affect the economies of industrial nations, and in particular,
pension programs like Social Security? What accounts for the rise in women's participation in the
wage labor force over the past century? How are family composition and poverty interrelated? Does
rapid population growth slow economic development with low income countries? In addition to these
topics, the course also covers selected methods not included in Dem/Soc 535/536 and 609.
SM 821. (NURS821) Proseminar in Health Outcomes Research. (M) Aiken, Lake.Prerequisite(s):
Prior coursework at undergraduate or masters level in statistics and quantitative methods.
This course is designed for doctoral students interested in conducting health outcomes research. The
course focuses on conceptual, methodological, statistical, feasibility and data issues central to the
conduct of health outcomes research. Penn faculty researchers will use their ongoing studies to
illustrate how study design, sampling, measurement, and advanced statistical techniques can be
employed to address the various challenges inherent in health outcomes research.

Page 25 of 26

SOCIOLOGY
(AS) {SOCI}
822. (NURS822) Applications of Health Outcome Research. (C) Aiken.Prerequisite(s): Prior
coursework at undergraduate or masters level in statistics and quantitative methods, Nursing 821/
Sociology 821 is preferred.
This the second of a two-course sequence designed for doctoral students interested in conducting
health outcomes research. The first course (821) focuses on conceptual, methodological, statistical,
feasibility and data issues central to the conduct of health outcomes research; the second course
(822) focuses on applying health outcomes research through the development and implementation of
a research project. In the first course Penn faculty researchers will use their ongoing studies to
illustrate how sampling, study design, measurement, and advanced statistical techniques can be
employed to address the various challenges inherent in health outcomes research. In the second
course, students will design and implement a health outcomes research project.
SM 860. (COMM860) GLOBAL MEDIA ACTIVISM.
SM 867. (COMM867) Media & Social Movements. (M) Yang.
Examines the meanings and roles of media and communication in social movements; analyzes media
reform activism; studies both historical movements and contemporary protests around the world (Arab
Spring, Indignados, Occupy, etc); covers a broad range of theoretical perspectives, especially network
and diffusion theories, political economy, narrative theory, and theories of performance. Students are
required to submit a final research paper.
SM 888. (COMM888) SPECIAL TOPICS.
998. Independent readings and research. (C) Staff.
For advanced students who work with individual instructors upon permission. Intended to go beyond
existing graduate courses in the study of specific problems or theories or to provide work opportunities
in areas not covered by existing courses.
999. Directed Readings and Research. (C) Staff.
Primarily for advanced students who work with individual instructors upon permission. Intended to go
beyond existing graduate courses in the study of specific problems or theories or to provide work
opportunities in areas not covered by existing courses.

Page 26 of 26

