SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & SOCIETY
(AS) {STSC}

SM 062. American Way of War. (M) Hersch.
SM 069. Computer Worlds. (C) Voskuhl.
SM 077. Voyages of Discovery. (M) Petrie.
Across the nineteenth century, voyages of sail and steam made possible the creation of empires and a
globalized world, through the transportation of people and commodities. Similarly, this course is a
voyage of discovery based on the study of actual ship's logs held in Penn's Rare Book collection. We
will use these accounts to guide our investigation into the science, technology, medicine, economic
and environmental history of life at sea and in the ports of call for these ships around the Indian and
Atlantic Oceans. Collectively, the seminar will produce an online exhibition built on logs, diaries and
other sources held at Penn, in other local collections and gleaned from archives around the world.
L/R 168. Environment anbd Society. (M) Humanities & Social Science Sector. Class of 2010 &
beyond. Benson.
This course examines contemporary environmental issues such as energy, waste, pollution, health,
population, biodiversity and climate through a historical and critical lens. All of these issues have
important material, natural and technical aspects; they are also inextricably entangled with human
history and culture. To understand the nature of this entanglement, the course will introduce key
concepts and theoretical frameworks from science and technology studies and the environmental
humanities and social sciences.
169. (ENVS169) Engineering Planet Earth. (C) Etienne Benson.
203. (HSOC203) Science, Medicine and Technology in Africa. (M)
SM 208. Science and Religion: Global Perspectives. (M) Harun Kucuk.
This survey course provides a thematic overview of science and religion from antiquity to the present.
We will treat well-known historical episodes, such as the emergence of Muslim theology, the Galileo
Affair and Darwinism, but also look beyond them. This course is designed to cover all major faith
traditions across the globe as well as non-traditional belief systems such as the New Age movement
and modern Atheism
SM 217. Science, Technology and Development in South and Southeast Asia. (M) Petrie.
SM 231. (HSOC231) Insect Epidemiology Pests, Pollinators and Disease Vectors. (M)
Malaria, Dengue, Chagas disease, the Plague--some of the most deadly and widespread infectious
diseases are carried by insects. The insects are also pernicious pests; bed bugs have returned from
obscurity to wreak havoc on communities, invasive species decimate agricultural production, and
wood borers are threatening forests across the United States. At the same time declines among the
insects on which we depend--the honeybees and other pollinators--threaten our food security and
ultimately the political stability of the US and other nations. We will study the areas where the insects
and humans cross paths, and explore how our interactions with insects can be cause, consequence or
symptom of much broader issues. This is not an entomology course but will cover a lot about bugs. Its
not a traditional epidemiology course but will cover some fascinating epidemiological theory originally
developed for the control of disease vectors. Its not a history cour but will cover past epidemics and
infestations tha have changed the course of the history of cities a reversed advancing armies.
Assignments will includ essays and presentations.

Page 1 of 13

SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & SOCIETY
(AS) {STSC}
SM 261. (HIST231) TOPICS IN US HISTORY. (C) Greene.
Topics vary
SM 279. (ENVS279, HIST320, HSOC279) Nature's Nation: Americans and Their Environment. (M)
Greene.
The United States has been described as "nature's nation. The presence of enormous, resource-rich
and sparsely settled continent has been a component of American identity, prosperity and pride--it has
even been described as the source of the democratic political system. From the beginning, Americans
transformed their natural environment, even as, over time, they grew to value environmental
preservation and protection. This course traces the interaction of Americans and the natural world in,
studying how Americans changes the natural environment over time, in order to understand why
environmental change occurred and occurred in the manner it did. What have Americans believed
about the nature of the nation's nature, and what attidues and policies have followed from these
ideas? After surveying American environmental history from the 17th to the 20th century, we will
examine specific topics and problems in the long relationship between Americans and their
environment. (Possible topics: national parks and wilderness preservation, environmental politics,
chemical pollution, invasive species). This seminar fulfills the researcj requirement for the History
major because students will complete a 20 page paper of original research.
SM 308. Science, Technology and Global Capitalism. (C) Staff.
Modern capitalism has been defined by the circulation of commodities, from gold in the 16th century to
sugar in the 17th, tobacco in the 18th, cotton in the 19th, oil in the 20th, and financial derivatives in the
21st. But the world is always messy and complex, rather than neatly divided into products and goods.
How, why, and for whose benefit do we divide nature into the abstractions of the marketplace? Who
holds power over where, why, and how that happens? In this seminar, we?ll use a wide range of
scholarship from the humanities, social sciences, and the sciences, along with primary texts and other
sources, in order to understand the close links among global capitalism, science and technology, and
the natural world.??
SM 310. Futurology. (M) Adams.Prerequisite(s): STSC 001,STSC 110.
This seminar will explore past attempts by scientists and visionaries to predict the future. After
exploring the nature and methodological problems inherent in prognostication that have caused most
such attempts to fail, we will focus on a series of interesting essays, stories, and visionary works that
seem to have successfully foreseen aspects of the world we live in, and attempt to analyze what they
got right, what they got wrong, and why. We will conclude with critical, historically informed analysis of
some current scientific prognostications about our short, intermediate, and longer term destiny.
Grading will be based on class participation, student reports, several short papers, and a final
research paper.
SM 314. (ARCH314) Cosmopolitan Urbanism: Rio de Janeiro. (M) Barber and Tresch.
SM 316. Science, Technology and Society in Modern East Asia. (M)
The course aims to survey the history of science and technology in East Asian countriesChina, Japan
and Koreasince the late 19th century. Since Japan was the only nation in East Asia that succeeded in
modernizing itself by adopting Western science, technology and politics, it will be studied first. The
Chinese and Korean cases then will be reviewed with different angles. The course will emphasize the
mutual influence between science & technology and society to answer how these countries became
major industrial powers in the 21st century.

Page 2 of 13

SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & SOCIETY
(AS) {STSC}
SM 328. What is Prediction?. (M) Kucuk.
This course is an investigation into the notion of prediction from antiquity to the present. By looking
closely at key practices from Homeric divination to modern acturial science and from early modern
astrology to contemporary climate models, the course seeks to historicize the way we engage with the
future. As part of the course, students also explore the role that methodology, models, causation and
big data have played in predictive practices. The readings include a mixture of primary sources,
modern scholarship and journalism.
SM 340. (HSOC340) The Curing Machine: Hospitals in Time. (M) Gina Greene.
SM 363. Technology & Democracy. (M) Voskuhl.
What is the relationship between technology and politics in global democracies? This course explores
various forms of technology, its artifacts and experts in relation to government and political decisionmaking. Does technology "rule' or "run" society, or should it? How do democratic societies balance the
need for specialized technological expertise with rule by elected representatives? Topics will include:
industrial revolutions, factory production and consumer society, technological utopias, the Cold War,
state policy, colonial and post-colonial rule, and engineers' political visions.
SM 364. (HIST305) Technologies of Research: Digital Methods in Action. (M)
This course asks three questions: What is technology? What is research? And how does technology
aid research? These three questions beg a fourth: how can we spend a semester on three questions?
Well, the answers to each of these questions may seem apparent, but think about them for more than
a few seconds and youll be hard pressed to offer a satisfactory answer. The term technology conjures
images of recent, micro-processors, robots, or the Internet. But think deeper about the terms meaning
for a moment and youll see that such ancient, elemental things as mathematics and the alphabet are
technologies, too. Likewise, youll find that something we have all done beforeresearchis an opaque
and contestable term. The question of research gets at the very processes through which knowledge
is produced.
SM 371. Emerging Techmologies. (M) Roberts.
SM 411. (HSOC411) Sports Science Medicine Technology. (M)
Why did Lance Armstrong get caught? Why do Kenyans win marathons? Does Gatorade really work?
In this course, we won't answer these questions ourselves but will rely upon the methods of history,
sociology, and anthropology to explore the world of the sport scientists who do. Sport scientists
produce knowledge about how human bodies work and the intricacies of human performance. They
bring elite (world-class) athletes to their laboratories-or their labs to the athletes. Through readings,
discussions, and original research, we will find out how these scientists determine the boundary
between "natural" and "performance-enhanced," work to conquer the problem of fatigue, and establish
the limits and potential of human beings. Course themes include: technology in science and sport, the
lab vs. the field, genetics and race, the politics of the body, and doping. Course goals include: 1)
reading scientific and medical texts critically, and assessing their social, cultural, and political origins
and ramifications; 2) pursuing an in-depth
The course fulfills the Capstone requirement for the HSOC/STSC majors. Semester-long research
projects will focus on "un-black-boxing" the metrics sport scientists and physicians use to categorize
athletes' bodies as "normal" or "abnormal." For example, you may investigate the test(s) used to
define whether an athlete is male or female, establish whether an athlete's blood is "too" oxygenated,
or assess whether an athlete is "too" fast (false start). Requirements therefore include: weekly
readings and participation in online and in-class discussions; sequenced research assignments; peer
review; and a final 20+page original research paper and presentation.

Page 3 of 13

SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & SOCIETY
(AS) {STSC}
SM 436. (HSOC436) Biopiracy: Medicinal Plants and Global Power. (M) Mukharji.
Biopiracy has emerged as the name of conflict between multinational pharmaceutical companies
attempting to get genetic patents on medicinal plants and indigenous communities in the Global South
who have long known and used these plants for medicinal purposes. Today the story of Biopiracy is an
unfolding story of plants, patents and power. The extraction and commercial exploitation of plants and
knowledge about them from the Global South however is not new. It has been happening at increasing
pace for at least the last two centuries. Both the anti-malarial drug quinine and the cancer drug
vincristine for instance have their plant-origins in the Global South where local communities used them
medicinally long before their discovery by biomedicine. This course will put the current debates around
Biopiracy in context and explore how the entanglements of plants and power have changed or not
changed.
SM 442. (HSOC442) Hospital as Curing Machine. (M) Gina Greene.
This course examines the technological, scientific, and spatial evolution of the modern hospital from
the miasmatic, vermin-infested medieval European hospital-as-alms house, to the late twentiethcentury ideal of the modern hospital as a condenser of sophisticated technologies, scientific expertise,
and Taylorist efficiencies. In so doing, we will see how designers of hospital space, consciously or not,
have striven to realize the mechanized, technological vision of the hospital as curing machine a
phrase first invoked by 18th century French surgeon and anatomist Jacques Tenon. While the early
nineteenth-century hospital had been a locus for fears about contagion, death, and disease in a pregerm theory world, through its eventual integration of antiseptic practices, spatially produced zones of
medical expertise (the operating suite, the laboratory, pediatric and maternity wards), novel
technologies (incubators, hyperbaric chambers, x-rays, ultrasounds) and factory-like efficiencies the
hospital came into its own as the epitome of rational modernist space. But, over the course of its
evolution, the modern ho other change as well: as an incubator for super-bugs, as an engine for
projects o and renewal, and as a site for the cultural transformation of the meaning of birth, death, and
health itself.
SM 443. Science and the Senses: Visual Culture, Material Objects. (M) Carin Berkowitz.
Using various types of readings, podcasts, and visits to area museums and centers of research, this
course examines the relationships between seeing, sensing, and knowing in science. What roles do
the senses and the material objects they observe play in production of science, and how has that
changed historically? Are the senses reliable and standardize able, and if so, how can we talk about
them with a common vocabulary? Are some more important than others? We will begin to answer
those questions historically, following the role of the senses in science from the early modern period
up to the present. We will look at ways in which vision was constructed as the primary sense during
the Enlightenment and at ways in which it was made objective and instrumentalized in the modern
period. We will also look at objects themselves. How do museum displays, illustrations jarred
specimens, photographs, and movies make and convey knowledge

Page 4 of 13

SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & SOCIETY
(AS) {STSC}
SM 461. (HSOC461) The Child in the City. Gina Greene.
This course examines the problem of the child in urban space in 19th and 20th century European and
American discourses. This course does not propose to recover the subjective experience of the child
but, rather, views the child as an object around which numerous adult anxieties connected to
industrialization, urbanization, and modernity itself cohered. Discourses on public health,
environmental pollution, sexuality, criminality, and racial degeneration all focused their attention,
anxieties, and energies on how to deal with the unique vulnerability of the child in modern urban
space. This interdisciplinary course focuses specifically on atmospheres, environments, and
architectures in urban settings as diverse as Chicago, New York, Paris, and London. We will examine
how the built environment was envisioned as part of a set of critical technologies for resolving the
threat that urban space posed to the child. We will explore objects and envir as diverse as tenement
babycages, war-time floating hospitals, open-air schools, adventu playgrounds in post-WWII London,
car-less communities in Radburn, NJ, and American chil books about urban blight and renewal.
SM 462. Technological & Business Innovation: Historical Perspectives. (M) Gross.
This course will explore the relationship between technolgical innovation and business history. By
looking at a series of case studies of technolgically driven firms -- both U.S and international -- we will
develop a more sophicticated and historically informed model of the relationship between
technological, economic, legal and political developments in the late 19th and 20th centuries.

SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, & SOCIETY (STSC)
L/R 001. (HSOC001) Emergence of Modern Science. (A) May be counted toward the Hum/SocSci
or NatSci/Math Sectors. Class of 2010 Adams.
During the last 500 years, science has emerged as a central and transformative force that continues to
reshape everyday life in countless ways. This introductory course will survey the emergence of the
scientific world view fromthe Renaissance through the end of the 20th century. By focusing on the life,
work and cultural contexts of those who created modern science, we will explore their core ideas and
techniques, where they came from, what problems they solved, what made them controversial and
exciting and how they related to contemporary religious beliefs, politics, art, literature, and music. The
course is organized chronologically and thematically. In short, this is a "Western Civ" course with a
difference, open to students at all levels.
L/R 002. (HIST036, HSOC002) Medicine in History. (A) History & Tradition Sector. All classes.
Barnes.
This course surveys the history of medical knowledge and practice from antiquity to the present. No
prior background in the history of science or medicine is required. The course has two principal goals:
(1)to give students a practical introduction to the fundamental questions and methods of the history of
medicine, and (2)to foster a nuanced, critical understanding of medicine's complex role in
contemporary society. The couse takes a broadly chronological approach, blending the perspectives of
the patient,the physician,and society as a whole--recognizing that medicine has always aspired to
"treat" healthy people as well as the sick and infirm. Rather than history "from the top down"or "from
the bottom up,"this course sets its sights on history from the inside out. This means, first, that medical
knowledge and practice is understood through the personal experiences of patients and caregivers. It
also means that lectures and discussions will take the long-discredited knowledge and treatments of
the past seriously,on their own terms, rather than judging them by todays's standards. Required
readings consist largely of primary sources, from elite medical texts to patient diaries. Short research
assignments will encourge students to adopt the perspectives of a range of actors in various historical
eras.

Page 5 of 13

SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & SOCIETY
(AS) {STSC}
003. (HSOC003, SOCI033) Technology and Society. (B) Society Sector. All classes. Staff.
Technology plays an increasing role in our understandings of ourselves, our communities, and our
societies, in how we think about politics and war, science and religion, work and play. Humans have
made and used technologies, though, for thousands if not millions of years. In this course, we will use
this history as a resource to understand how technolgoeis affect social relations, and coversely how
the culture of a society shapes the technologies it produces. Do different technolgoeis produce or
result from different economic systems like feudalism, capitalism and communism? Can specific
technologies promote democratic or authoritarian politics? Do they suggest or enforce different
patterns of race, class or gender relations? Among the technologies we'll consider will be large objects
like cathedrals, bridges, and airplanes; small ones like guns, clocks and birth control pills; and
networks like the electrical grid, the highway system and the internet.
SM 013. The Scientific Revolution. (C) Adams.
The Scientific Revolution of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries created the intellectual,
philosophical, social, and institutional foundations of modern science, fundamentally changing the way
we see the universe and our place within it. In this seminar we will take a biographical approach,
exploring that revolution by examining the lives, ideas and achievements of some of the period's most
renowed and consequential thinkers, among them Copernicus, Kepler, Galileo, Bacon, Descartes, and
Newton. In the course of our biographical explorations, we will also consider the rise of scientific
societies, the "scientific method," "experimental philosophy," the impact of new technologies (including
the telescope and the microscope), and the politial and religious implications of the new scientific
world view.
SM 021. From Darwin to DNA. (M) Lindee.
026. (PHIL026) Relativity and the Philosophy of Space and Time. (A) Natural Science &
Mathematics Sector. Class of 2010 and beyond. Domoter. Also fulfills General Requirement in Science
Studies for Class of 2009 and prior
This course will present a detailed introduction to Einstein's special and general theories of relativity
and will examine their historical development and philosophical significance. No previous physics or
philosophy will be presupposed, and only high school mathematics will be used.
SM 028. (HIST025, HSOC025, RELS116) Western Science, Magic and Religon 1600 to the
present. (C) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Kuklick.
Throughout human history, the relationships of science and religion, as well as of science and magic,
have been complex and often surprising. This course will cover topics ranging from the links between
magic and science in the seventeenth century to contemporary anti-science movements.
SM 032. (HSOC032) Risky Business. (M) Schwartz.
SM 079. Animal City: Humans & Animals in Urban America 1850-present. (C) Greene.

Page 6 of 13

SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & SOCIETY
(AS) {STSC}
SM 107. (HSOC107) Science, Technology & Medicine in Colonial India. (C) P. Mukharji.
What is the relationship between science and empire? Is colonial science somehow different from
science more generally? These are some of the questions this course seeks to explore. By focussing
on the history of British India? which included India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and Myanmar?
the course examines in depth the role and nature of science within colonial societies. In so doing, the
course also explores the specific histories of botany, medicine, telegraphy, agronomy, anthropologu,
physics and statistics. While attending to the specific people, practices and ideas involved in these
sciences in the colonies, the course is also interested in locating specific colonial histories within the
larger history of science.
SM 108. (COML224, PHIL225) Introduction to Philosophy of Science. (M) Domotor.
A discussion of some philosophical questions that naturally arise in scientific research. Issues to be
covered include: The nature of scientific explanation, the relation of theories to evidence, and the
development of science (e.g., does science progress? Are earlier theories refuted or refined?).
L/R 110. (COML074, ENGL075, HIST117, HSOC110) Science and Literature. (B) Arts & Letters
Sector. All Classes. Adams.
This course will explore the emergence of modern science fiction as a genre, the ways it has reflected
our evolving conceptions of ourselves and the universe, and its role as the mythology of modern
technological civilization. We will discuss such characteristic themes as utopias, the explortion of
space and time, biological engineering, superman, robots, aliens, and other worlds--and the
differences between European and American treatment of these themes.
SM 123. (HSOC123) Darwin's Legacy: The Evolution of Evolution. (B) Living World Sector. All
classes. Adams.
Darwin's conceptions of evolution have become a central organizing principle of modern biology. This
lecture course will explore the origins and emergence of his ideas, the scientific work they provoked,
and their subsequent re-emergence into modern evolutionary theory. In order to understand the living
world, students will have the opportunity to read and engage with various classic primary sources by
Darwin, Mendel, and others. The course willconclude with guest lectures on evolutionary biology today,
emphasizing currentissues, new methods, and recent discoveries. In short, this is a lecture course on
the emergence of modern evolutionary biology--its central ideas, their historical development and their
implications for the human future.
SM 135. (HIST035) Emergence of Modern Biology. (C) Natural Science & Mathematics Sector.
Class of 2010 and beyond. Adams.
This course covers the history of biology in the 19th and 20th centuries, focusing on the development
of evolutionary biology, cell biology, embryology, genetics, and molecular biology. We will have three
main goals: first, to delineate the content of the leading biological theories and experimental practices
of the past two centuries; second, to situate these theories and practices in their historical context,
noting the complex interplay between them and the dominant social, political, and economic trends;
and, third, to critically evaluate various methodological approaches to the history of science. The
course is intended for students with some background in the history of science as well as in biology,
although no specific knowledge of either subject in required.

Page 7 of 13

SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & SOCIETY
(AS) {STSC}
L/R 145. (HIST146, HSOC145) Comparative Medicine. (A) History & Tradition Sector. All classes.
Mukharji.
This course explores the medical consequences of the interaction between Europe and the "nonWest." It focuses on three parts of the world Europeans colonized: Africa, South Asia, and Latin
America. Today's healing practices in these regions grew out of the interaction between the medical
traditions of the colonized and those of the European colonizers. We therefore explore the nature of
the interactions. What was the history of therapeutic practices that originated in Africa or South Asia?
How did European medical practices change in the colonies? What were the effects of colonial racial
and gender hierarchies on medical practice? How did practitioners of "non-Western" medicine carve
out places for themselves? How did they redefine ancient traditions? How did patients find their way
among multiple therapeutic traditions? How does biomedicine take a different shape when it is
practiced under conditions of poverty, or of inequalities in power? How do today's medical problems
grow out of this history? This is a fascinating history of race and gender, of pathogens and conquerors,
of science and the body. It tells about the historical and regional roots of today's problems in
international medicine.
152. (HSOC157) Chinese Science. (C) Staff.
This course explores the social, cultural and political contexts of scientific knowledge in China over the
course of two millennia, through a diverse cast of historica actors spanning emperors and midwives,
Buddhist monks and Jesuits, eminent authorities and everyday people. We will examine the evoliutio of
various learned traditions (astronomy, alchemy, medicine, natural history) that sought to define and
understand the heavens, the earth and the body - and the manner in which those forms of knowledge
could be deployed for the good of state, society or individual. In the process, we will compare Chinese
experience to other cultures and evaluate the status and dynamics of Chinese traditions in the modern
era of Western political and scientific dominance. No prior knowledge of Chinese history is assumed.
Class discussion will be a part of each meeting.
160. (SOCI161) The History of the Information Age. (C) Humanities & Social Science Sector. Class
of 2010 & beyond. Staff.
Certain new technologies are greeted with claims that, for good or ill, they must transform our society.
The two most recent: the computer and the Internet. But the series of social, economic and
technological developments that underlie what is often called the Information Revolution include much
more than just the computer. In this course, we explore the history of information technology and its
role in contemporary society. We will explore both the technologies themselves--calculating machines,
punched card tabulators, telegraph and telephone networks, differential analyzers, digital computers,
and many others--and their larger social, economic and political contexts. To understand the roots of
these ideas we look at the prehistory of the computer, at the idea of the post-industrial or information
society, at parallels with earlier technologies and at broad historical currents in the United States and
the world.
SM 162. (HSOC152) Technology and Medicine in Modern America. (L) Staff.
Medicine as it exists in contemporary America is profoundly technological; we regard it as perfectly
normal to be examined with instruments, to expose our bodies to many different machines; and to
have knowledge produced by those machines mechanically/electronically processed, interpreted and
stored. We are billed technologically, prompted to attend appointments technologically, and often buy
technologies to protect, diagnose, or improve our health: consider, for example, HEPA-filtering vacuum
cleaners; air-purifiers; fat-reducing grills; bathroom scales; blood pressure cuffs; pregnancy testing kits;
blood-sugar monitoring tests; and thermometers. Yet even at the beginning to the twentieth century,
medical technologies were scarce and infrequently used by physicians and medical consumers alike.
Over the course of this semester, we will examine how technology came to medicine's center-stage,
and what impact this change has had on medical practice, medical institutions and medical consumers
- on all of us!

Page 8 of 13

SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & SOCIETY
(AS) {STSC}
179. (ENVS179, HSOC179) Environmental History. (M) Greene.
The field of environmental history studies human history in the context of the biological and physical
setting we call "nature" or "the environment." It focuses on the interactions between natural actors
(landscapes, weather, plants, animals, microorganisms) and human actors. Just as human actors have
shaped the biological and physical world, so actors from the biological and physical world have
shaped human history. This course explores the history of American environmental change as a set of
questions about how and why the natural world have changed over time. Topics include: European
encounters with the Americas, industralization, conservation of natural resources, preservation of
wilderness and wildlife, urban pollution and health, the rise of environmentalism, and the impact of
warfare. In each case we will ask how natural actors and Americans' ideas about nature interacted
with political institutions, economic arrangements, social groups and cultural values, in order to explain
the course of environmental change. We will explore the multiple, shifting meanings of "nature," trace
changes in environmental use and impact, and evaluate past events in light of current ideas about
sustainability.
182. (GSWS182) Social Science and American Culture. (C) Staff.
This course examines the role of social science in the United States during the 20th century. there
have been popular social scientific theories since the early 19th century, when the craze spread for
interpreting individuals' character by feeling the bumps on their heads. But popular social science is
really a 20th century phenomenon. And popular culture influenced academic research. Our coverage
cannot be comprehensive. We have insufficient time to treat all human sciences equally. For example,
there is enormous popular interest in paleoanthropology and archaeology, but we will not discuss
these in class-although you mibht choose to write your research paper for the course on a spcific
aspect of one of these disciplines.
201. Hist Phys Sci 19th & 20th Century. (M) Ashrafi.
Over the last two centuries, scientists have produced a broad range of knowledge about the physical
world, from light to electromagnetism to atoms to nuclei, facilitating or explaining an ever increasing
mastery over the natural world. Becuse of their success, these developments played an important role
in forming our views of how to effectively generate knowledge of the natural world. This course will
examine some of the major developments in the physical sciences during the 19th and 20th century,
asking how that knowledge and the means by which it was produced related to institutions, technical
practices and broader cultural knowledge and knowledge production to explore how past practices
have, or have not, left their traces in later science. The course will meet twice a week for lecture and
discussion. Readings will consist of Pursuing Power and Light: Technology and Physics from James
Watt to Albert Einstein by Bruce J. Hunt When Physics Became King by Iwan Rhys Morus Night
Thoughts of a Classical Physicist by Russel McCormmach as well as articles from a course reader.
Students will produce three short papers (about three pages) and a term paper (about ten pages)
L/R 212. (HSOC212) Science Technology and War. (M) Humanities & Social Science Sector. Class
of 2010 & beyond. Lindee.
In this survey we explore the relationships between technical knowledge and war in the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries. We attend particularly to the centrality of bodily injury in the history of war.
Topics include changing interpretations of the machine gun as inhumane or acceptable; the cult of the
battleship; banned weaponry; submarines and masculinity; industrialized war and total war; trench
warfare andmental breakdown; the atomic bomb and Cold War; chemical warfarein Viet nam; and
"television war" in the 1990s.

Page 9 of 13

SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & SOCIETY
(AS) {STSC}
L/R 253. (COML253, ENGL240, GSWS252, HSOC253) Freud: The Invention of Psychoanalysis.
(M) Humanities & Social Science Sector. Class of 2010 & beyond. Weissberg. All readings and
lectures in English General Requirement VII: Science Studies
No other person of the twentieth century has probably influenced scientific thought, humanitistic
scholarship, medical therapy, and popular culture as much as Sigmund Freud. This seminar will study
his work, its cultural background, and its impact on us today.
SM 260. (ANTH260, SOCI260) Cyberculture. (C) Staff.
Computers and the internet have beome critical parts of our lives and culture. In this course, we will
explore how people use these new technologies to develop new conceptions of identify, build virtual
communities and affect political change. Each week we'll see what we can learn by thinking about the
internet in a different way, focusing successively on hackers, virtuality, community, sovreignty,
interfaces, algorithms and infrastructure. We'll read books, articles, and blogs about historical and
contemporary cultures of computing, from Spacewar players and phone phreaks in the 1970s to
Google, Facebook, World of Warcraft, WikiLeaks, and Anonymous today. In addition, we'll explore
some of these online communities and projects ourselves and develop our own analyses of them.
SM 269. Computers, Ethics, and Social Values. (M) Staff.
This course will explore the various social implication of information technology: social, cultural,
political and economic. Topics will include technology policy, organizational change, globalism and the
digital divide, intellectual property rights, Linux and the free software movement, cyber libertarianims,
and the rise and fallof the dot.com economy.
SM 272. (ENVS272) Energy in America. (M) Greene.
Energy is at the center of many discussions of today's world. How central is an apparently unlimited
supply of energy to a helthy economy? What is the importance of sources of energy supply to national
security? How can we expend the energy we need to foster human life as we know it without allowing
climate change to disrupt the existing global environments that sustain the lives of humans and other
living species in accustomed ways? How crucial is the current level of energy use to patterns of
American consumption, and how willing are Americans to alter their consumption habits in order to
reduce energy use? What is the connection between various sources of energy and the relationships
of social, economic, and political power tht exist in the U.S. today. This course will examine changes in
energy sources, energy use, and energy technolgoeis across American history in order to help
students understand how the U.S. and the world arrived at its present situation with regard to energy
and to understnad the complex technological, environmental, social, eocnomic, and political
challenges implicit in any effort to modify the current trajectories of energy use.
SM 288. (SOCI282) Knowledge and Social Structure. (C) Humanities & Social Science Sector.
Class of 2010 & beyond. Staff.
Throughout human history, the relationships of science and religion, as well as of science and magic,
been omplex and often surprising. This course we cover topis ranging from the links between magic
and science in the seventeenth century to contemporary anti-science movements.
299. Independent Study. (C)

Page 10 of 13

SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & SOCIETY
(AS) {STSC}
SM 307. (HSOC307) Globalization & Medicine in Colonial & Postcolonial South Asia. (C) P.
Mukharji.
This seminar will explore a wide range of themes at the intersection of globalization and therapeutic
cultures in South Asia and amongst South Asian diasporas. To begin with the course understands
'supraterritoriality' as the key feature of globalization and proceeds to interrogate the myriad ways in
which this supraterritoriality was produced, consumed, used an dabused within the theraeutic cultures
that have been, and on occasion still are, available inSouth Asia-both in reality and symbolically. Each
week, through a specific case study, framed by a few theoretical readings, we will attempt to deepen
and problematize the simple definition of globalization with which we start the course. Throughout the
course there will be a strong emphasis on combining case study-based empirical material and
theoretical interventions in Cultural Theory and Postcolonial Studies.
SM 312. (HSOC312) Weapons of Mass Destruction. (C) Lindee.
The course explores the historical development of traditional weapons of mass destcruction such as
chemical, nuclear and biological agents, in addition to newer and seemingly non-traditional weapons
such as land mines and civilian aircraft that can also be employed to cause large numbers of injuries
and deaths among civilian and military populations. Through case studies in technology and public
health, students will evaluate the medical, scientific, environmental, and cultural ramifications of these
weapons and their effect on human heal and society by analyzing the rise of the military-industrialacademic-complex in twentieth century America.
SM 318. Experiment in the Modern Life Sciences. (M) Staff.
Experients on living material are now controversial for ethical reasons (think stem cells, animal
experimentation and animal rights, etc), but the scientific merit of experimenting onthe living is rarely
challenged. We tend to take for granted that experiments are the best way to understand biology, but
inthe nineteenth century, the opposite was true. Why has this changed, and what are he implications of
the change? Is the appearance of consensus around the role of experiment in biology simply a false
impression? These are the sorts of questions that this course will explore through popular, scientific,
and historical literature.
SM 322. (ENGL248) Edgar Allan Poe's Science. (C) Tresch.
You proabably read Poe first in junior high, and his works are often treated as juvenile: cheap thrills,
campy horror,self-indulgent longing. But Poe also engaged with the most serious issues faced by his
period, from politics and philosphy to industralization and science. His works dealt with these concerns
in a variety of ways, while reflecting all along about the conditions of literature in a newly
commercialized marketplace. This seminar will look at Poe's literary innovations through the lens of the
developing technology and science of the early republic. It will examine the political importance of new
institutions for research and diffusion as well as various emerging venues for popular science,
including the journals in which Poe wrote as an early science reporter. The course thus explores the
peculiar situtation of science and technology in the early USA, at the same time as it reveals the
varied and complex literary production of Poe in a new and revealing light.
SM 329. (GSWS330) Gender and Science. (M) Lindee.
This course explores the gendered nature of science as social endeavor, intellectual construct and
political resource. We consider the rise of gentlemanly science, masculinity and the arms race, the
notion of a "Successor science" grounded in feminist theory, and the historical role of gender in
defining who can do science and what counts as scientific data. We also explore how science has
interpreted male-female differences. Our goal is to understand the profound impact of social place in
the history of science, and thereby to understand the social nature of scientific knowledge.

Page 11 of 13

SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & SOCIETY
(AS) {STSC}
SM 368. (GRMN239) Sustainability & Utopianism. (M) Wiggin.
This seminar explores how the humanities can contribute to discussions of sustainability. We begin by
investigating the contested term itself, paying close attention to critics and activists who deplore the
very idea that we should try to sustain our, in their eyes, dystopian present, one marked by
environmental catastrophe as well as by an assault on the educational ideals long embodied in the
humanities. We then turn to classic humanist texts on utopia, beginning with More's fictive island of
1517. The "origins of environmentalism" lie in such depictions of island edens (Richard Grove), and
our course proceeds to analyze classic utopian tests from American, English, and German literatures.
Readings extend to utopian visions from Europe and America of the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries, as well as literary and visual texts that deal with contemporary nuclear and flood
catastrophes. Authors include: Bill McKibben, Jill Kerr Conway, Christopher Newfield, Thomas More,
Francis Bacon, Karl Marx, Henry David Thoreau, Robert Owens, William Morris, Charlotte Perkins
Gilman, Ayn Rand, Christa Wolf, and others.
SM 379. (HSOC379) Animals in Science Medicine Technology. (C) Greene.
This course examines different ways of knowing about animals, categorizing animals and relating to
animals, through the sciences, medicine, and technological practices. It will explore the history of
animals in human society, changes over time in human-animal relationships, and different sites of
human-animal relationships and of knowledge production about animals. Topics may include:
domestication, animal breeding, work animals and pets, animal archaeology, veterinary medicine,
zoos, wildlife science and management and animal welfare. This is a seminar that will include visiting
speakers, workshop exercises, films, and on-campus field trips. Student will write several short papers
and a research project
SM 388. Who Owns the Past. (M) Staff.
Stories told about the past have long been understood as moral lessons. And historical narratives
have also been susceptible to different readings by opposed parties. But the strength of appeals to the
past is not a constant: historical experience has at some times and in some places been seen as
irrelevant to practical action. Today, in the United States as well as in many other parts of the world,
appeals to historical precedent carry considerable weight, and are made for many purposes. For
example, the dissolution of Yugoslavia, has been explained as a result of centuries-old ethic tensions,
yet when Yugoslavia was created at the end of World War I, objections were countered with the
anthropological judgment that the new nation's ethnic divisions were not really significant. Or consider
the debate over the ownership of the bones of so-called "Kennewick Man," which pitted Native
Amerians against scientists over questions of identity and legal claims. Or, historical generalizations in
biology over the value of Darwin's theory, resulting in political debates in local and school board
elections and presidential contests. This course will discuss the uses of history in contemporary and
past situations, drawing examples from the United States, Europe, the Midfle East, and Africa.
SM 400. Undergraduate Seminar in Science Technology and Society. (B) Staff.
This is a capstone seminar for STSC maors, and a required seminar for any STSC junior who wishes
to write a senior thesis for honors in the major. It is designed to provide the tools necessary to
undertake original research by guiding students through the research and writing process. Students
will produce either a polished proposal for a senior thesis project, or a completed research paper by
the end of the term. Although each student will work on a different topic, the class will focus on general
aspects of historical, and social scientific research and guide students through a close reading of key
texts in science and technology studies.

Page 12 of 13

SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & SOCIETY
(AS) {STSC}
SM 410. Science Fiction. (M) Adams.
An exploration of the interface between science and literature, including: the role of genre, narrative
form, metaphor, and style in science; the depiction of science and scientists in fiction; the role of
popular culture in reflecting--and creating--the social meaning of science and technology; and the use
of science fiction in teaching the history of science, technology and medicine. Themes will include
utopias, robots, supermen, aliens, time travel, alternate histories, and future histories.
SM 413. (HSOC413) Perfect Bodies. (C) Linker.
SM 426. (PHIL426) Philosophy of Psychology. (M) Hatfield.
Is there a science of psychology distinct from physiology? If there is, what is its subject matter? What
is the relationship between scientific psychology and traditional philosophical investigation of the
mental? Examination of these questions is followed by analysis of some concepts employed in
cognitive psychology and cognitive science, particularly in the fields of perception and cognition.
SM 471. (HSOC471) Guns and Health. (A) Sorenson.
The purpose of this course is for students to gain an understanding of the role of guns in health, and
population and prevention approaches to violence. The course will include a focus on policies and
regulations related to firearms, the primary mechanism by which violence-releated fatalities occur in
the U.S. We will address the life span of a gun, from design and manufacture through to use. In
addition, we will address key aspects of the social context in which firearms exist and within which
firearm policy is made.
498. Honors Thesis. (A) Staff.
499. Undergraduate Independent Study. (C)
Available with all members of the department faculty subjects ranging from the history of anthropology
to the sociology of institutions.

Page 13 of 13

