SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}

Master of Social Work courses
601. History and Philosophy of Social Work and Social Welfare. (A)
This course offers a historical perspective for understanding current issues of social welfare and social
work. It examines the social, racial, political, and economic forces that explain the development of
social welfare and social work in the United States. Particular emphasis is placed on the role of gender
and race in shaping social policy. Programs, policies, and issues are analyzed as responses to longterm changes in social and economic conditions in the United States and the needs and demands of
oppressed groups for full participation in the life of the country.
602. Human Behavior in the Social Environment. (A)
This course introduces the student to the individual and family components of social interaction in a
variety of different milieus. Theories of self and personality are studied, along with theories related to
traditional and nontraditional family styles, different social and ethnic groups, and of assimilation and
acculturation. Emphasis is given to the impact of different cultures and traditions on individual
functioning. Additional attention is given to selected social characteristics of the larger society, such as
factors of socio-economic class which influence individual and family behavior and functioning.
603. American Racism and Social Work Practice. (A)
This course explores racism in America as a historical and contemporary phenomenon. It emphasizes
the development of evidence based knowledge about institutional systems of racism, analytical skill in
understanding the complexity of institutional racism and other forms of oppression more broadly
defined, self awareness, and the implications of racism for social work services and practices.
604. Foundations of Social Work Practice I. (A)
This is a first of a four course sequence designed to help students develop a professional stance and
evidence-based framework for social work services to individuals, groups, families, and communities. It
integrates the student's theoretical learning with the experience in the field placement agency. The
student is introduced to a holistic process-oriented approach to social work practice and to methods
for implementation. The course emphasizes the social context for practice with special attention to
agency purpose, functions and structure; the client system and its perceptions of need; goals and
resources and the social worker as a facilitator of change.
614. Foundations of Social Work Practice II. (B) Prerequisite(s): SWRK604.
This is the second in a four course sequence and continues the examination and use of practice
frameworks and methods for service delivery in working with individuals, groups, families and
communities. It emphasizes the eradication of institutional racism and other forms of oppression along
with the integration of a culturally sensitive approach to social work practice. Attention is given to
understanding client problems in the context of different social work practice approaches and service
requirements and to increased use of professional values to guide and inform practice.

Page 1 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
SM 615. Introduction to Social Work Research. (B)
This course presents the broad range of research tools that social workers can use to improve the
effectiveness and efficiency of their practice. The course emphasizes the process of theory
development, conceptualization, and hypothesis formulation across a broad spectrum of social work
practice situations. The course includes methodological considerations relating to concept
operationalization; research design (experimental, survey, and field), sampling instrumentation,
methods of data collection and analysis, and report preparation and dissemination. The course also
emphasizes how social work research can help professionals better understand and more effectively
impact problems of racism and sexism in contemporary American society.
SM 620. Integrative Seminar. (L) Prerequisite(s): Advanced Standing MSW students only.
701. Health and Mental Health Policy. (C) MSW Elective
This course provides an overal view of the historical, social and economic dimensions of the health
care delivery system: how health policies are developed and implemented, and how such policies
influence social work practice, program planning, and research. Key health policy issues such as
financing,cost, access, and the allocation of resources are explored in the context of health reform
proposals. Students investigate how health policy affects specific population groups such as women
and children, persons with chronic mental illnesses, persons with AIDS, older adults, and minorities.
702. Social Work Practice in Health Care. (C) Clincal Practice Elective
This course focuses on key issues in social work practice in health care settings. Social aspects of
health and illness, including cultural variations, health beliefs and behavior, and the impact of illness
on the patient and the family, are examined and their relevance for practice is discussed. Appropriate
theoretical models for practice are identified and applied to practice in the areas of prevention, primary
care, chronic and long-term care. New roles for social work in varied health delivery systems and interprofessional collaboration are explored.
703. Impacting Government Policy in Pennsylvania. (M) Macro Practice Elective
This course focuses on social changes in health care as it impacts the lives of older people and their
families. Using Pennsylvania as a model, we will focus on the administrative and legislative systems.
Topics will include the recent controversial changes to Medicare, re-balancing of the long-term care
system and efficacy of behavioral health treatment programs. Students will learn how to impact social
change at the policy level by planning a social marketing campaign. They will develop materials to
influence consumer understanding and behavior, such as editorial and legislative briefings. Students
will have the opportunity to interact with officials, legislators, and advocates as they build the
framework to support a social change agenda.
704. Advanced Clinical Social Work Practice I. (A) Required for clinical Practice Concentration
Building on the foundation established in the foundation social work practice courses, this course
introduces advanced theoretical frameworks for clinical practice from which students build conceptual
practice frameworks. The course helps students choose and learn the components of a practice
approach in the context of social assessment, agency auspices, and the student's developing
theoretical framework.

Page 2 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
706. Policies for Children and Their Families. (C) Policy Option
This course examines policies for children and their families with a specific focus on child welfare
policy. The course examines the interrelationship between: the knowledge base on child abuse and
neglect; evaluations of interventions; programs and policies designed to protect maltreated children;
and child welfare policy at the state and national level. The course also examines federal and state
laws that govern the funding and operation of child welfare systems; the history of child welfare
policies; the operation of child welfare systems; and the legal, political and social forces that influence
the structure and function of child welfare systems in the United States.
708. Advanced Macro Social Work Practice I. (A) Required for Macro Practice Concentration
Advanced Macro Social Work practice builds on the foundation social work practice courses and is
composed of three interrelated disciplines: community organization, planning, and administration. In
Macro Practice courses, the student develops knowledge and skills for practice in communities,
organizations, and/or other social systems. This course, the first of two Macro Practice courses, begins
by developing a theoretical framework for macro practice. Knowledge and skill development focuses
primarily on social work practice within communities and on the planning of service delivery at the
community level. Students learn how to identify community-based social problems, organize and build
relationships with communities, and develop programs. Specific skill development includes learning
how to conduct needs assessments, staff committees, run meetings, and write grants. The content is
integrated with fieldwork and is specific to the service needs of the populations with whom students
are working in their field agencies.
714. Advanced Clinical Social Work Practice II. (B) Prerequisite(s): SWRK704. Required for Clinical
Practice Concentration
The focus of learning in this semester is differential intervention and the expansion of the professional
role and repertoire. Students extend and refine their practice knowlege and skills and learn to
intervene with group systems and selected problems. Students consolidate their identification as
professionals and learn to constructively use environment to affect systems change.
709. Heterosexism and Social Work. (C) MSW Elective
This course builds on the foundation year focus on institutional oppression by applying this model to
the status of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people in U.S. society and in social welfare
systems. The course assesses the relationship of heterosexism and homophobia to other forms of
institutional oppression, including racism and sexism. The course includes an overview of the
treatment of sexual minorities in the U.S. and in the social work profession with a focus on issues
related to lesbian, gay, bisexual; and transgender clients as an under-served and mis-served
population. The intersection of racism and heterosexism is a focal point to explore the concerns and
needs of LGBTQ people of color. Current theoretical frameworks for understanding sexual identity and
the uniqure situations of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and questioning people throughout the life
cycle will be identified. Social work strategies for addressing heterosexism in social welfare agencies
and communities will be explored by examining both micro and macro social work practice issues. The
course will include a critical assessment of the state of social work education on the topic.

Page 3 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
SM 712. (URBS454) City Limits: The Impact of Urban Policy. (B) Prerequisite(s): Students must
have taken an introduction to research methods. MSW elective
This course assesses the changing role of public policy in American cities. In the past, government
often believed that it could direct urban development. New realities - the rise of an informal labor
market, global capital and labor flows, the flight of businesses and the middle class to the suburbs have demonstrated that government must see itself as one - but only one - 'player' in a more complex,
transactional process of policy making that crosses political boundaries and involves business,
organized interest groups, and citizens.
This seminar uses a case-study method to study how public policy can make a difference in the
revitalization of distressed American cities. The seminar is designed for advanced undergraduates and
graduate students. Seminar readings and projects will be organized around three themes: 1) history
and vision, 2) data and analysis, and 3) policy and implementation. Students will be divided into project
teams assigned to work on current development issues that will be reviewed by both public and
private-sector experts. Extensive use will be made of real estate, economic development, and social
indicator data to understand the complex forces at work in both large and small cities. Students will
learn to access, analyze, and map information; to frame and interpret these data within a regional
perspective; and to construct profiles of cities and neighborhoods. Students will study recent urban
redevelopment initiatives in the Philadelphia region, including Philadelphia's Neighborhood
Transformations Initiative and New Jersey's Camden Revitalization plans.
713. Understanding Social Change: Issues of Race and Gender. (B) Prerequisite(s): SWRK 603.
This course builds upon the foundation of historical, psychological, sociological, economic, political,
and personal knowledge about institutionalized forms of racism and discrimination developed in SWRK
603, American Racism and Social Work Practice. The course uses understanding elements of
oppression to critically examine strategies for addressing racism and sexism in organizations and
communitites through systematic assessment and planning for social change. The course examines
change at three levels: organizations, communitites, and social movements.
715. Introduction to Social Work Research. (A) Required Course
This course presents the broad range of research tools that social workers can use to improve the
effectiveness and efficiency of their practice. The course emphasizes the process of theory
development, conceptualization, and hypothesis formulation across a broad spectrum of social work
practice situations. The course includes methodological considerations relating to concept
operationalization; research design (experimental, survey, and field), sampling instrumentation,
methods of data collection and analysis, and report preparation and dissemination. The course also
emphasizes how social work research can help professionals better understand and more effectively
impact problems of racism and sexism in contemporary American society.
718. Advanced Macro Social Work Practice II. (B) Prerequisite(s): SWRK708. Required for Macro
Practice Concentration
This course, the second of two Macro Practice courses, helps students develop the knowledge and
skills required to become an effective and creative social work manager. Management and behavioral
science theories and concepts, as well as techniques and methods, are introduced. Students also
learn how to strategically plan programs at the organizational level and explore how public policy
influences service delivery. Students learn to utilize administrative skills to promote social change
within a variety of systems that influence the lives of client populations. Students have the opportunity
to apply this administrative content to their field agency.

Page 4 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
719. Prenatal and Early Childhood Development. (M) MSW Elective.
This course presents a coherent portrait of the development that transforms a person from the
prenatal period to infancy to young childhood. The course bridges standard theories of development
with new approaches such as social learning, cognitive development, developmental psychobiology,
and other psychological theories used to understand the child. Integration of different perspectives on
development is geared to demonstrate the interrelated nature of growth in cognition, learning,
language, emotions, personality, physical growth and social behaviors. Students research areas of
individual interest. MSW Elective
726. Brief Treatment and Crisis Intervention. (C) Clinical Practice Elective
This course focuses on theory and practice of planned brief treatment in social work practice, primarily
with individuals but with attention to couples, families and other groupings. The course covers the
history of and different approaches to brief treatment. Topics include treatment issues such as criteria
for selection of clients, understanding the importance of time in the treatment relationship, the use of
history, the importance of focusing, the process of termination and other issues related to brief
interventions. Particular attention will be paid to the use of brief treatment approaches in crisis
situations. The course presents various methods of assessing an individual's crisis and of helping
clients mobilize their strengths to utilize customary methods of coping and learn newer ways of coping.
Clinical Practice Elective
720. Middle Childhood and Adolescence. (M) MSW Elective
This course focuses initially on growth and behavior in the often overshadowed period of middle
childhood, and in greater depth on the adolescent period. Change in the psychological, physical,
cognitive and social domains of growth is examined and is related to changing relationships and overt
behaviors. The influence of social factors is a continuing theme. Concepts like "adolescent rebellion"
are questioned and re-evaluated. Connections between uneven development and social problem
behavior are examined. Knowledge is salient to school social work as well as to other practice
domains. Students research areas of individual interest. MSW elective
722. Practice with Children and Adolescence. (C) Clinical Practice Elective
This course provides a foundation for social work practice with children and adolescents. Beginning
with an overview of normative child and adolescent development and psychosocial developmental
theory, the course covers various methods for helping at-risk children and adolescents and their
families. Emphasizing the complex interplay between children and adolescents and their social
environments, consideration will be given to biological, temperamental, and developmental status; the
familial/cultural context; the school context; and other aspects of the physical and social environment.
Particular attention is paid to working with socially, emotionally, financially, and physically challenged
and deprived children and adolescents and their families. Clinical Practice Elective.
724. Developmental Disabilities. (C) Clinical Practice Elective; required for students in the HSV
program
This course enhances the students' ability to practice social work with and on behalf of people with
developmental disabilities and their families. The course provides a base of knowledge about
developmental disabilities and differences, their causes and characteristics. Students learn how
disabilities and learning differences impact personal, familial, educational, social, and economic
dimensions for the individual, family and society, with attention to the person's special life cycle needs
and characteristics. The course also emphasizes legislative, programmatic, political, economic, and
theoretical formulations fundamental to service delivery. Clinical Practice Elective

Page 5 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
727. Practice with Families. (C) Clinical Practice Elective
This course provides students with assessment and intervention skills for social work practice with
varied family/partner configurations. The course begins with a grounding in family systems theory and
proceeds to explore patterns of interaction in terms of the wide range of problems that families and
partners bring to social agencies. Emphasis is given to exploring ways of supporting change in
interaction patterns. Readings are augmented by videotapes of family sessions and simulations of
clinical situations from students'field practice. Clinical Practice Elective
729. Social Statistics. (C) Research Option
This course provides students with a broad range of statistical methods and applications. It introduces
social work students to the use of quantitative data for planning and evaluating social programs and
social policy. Course topics include conceptualization and measurement of variables and basic
techniques and concepts for exploring and categorizing data, for generalizing research findings and
testing hypotheses, and for statistical data processing. Students will gain experience in using a
Windows-based statistical software package on personal computers. Emphasis is placed on the
practical application of data to address social policy and social work practice issues. Students have the
opportunity to critique the application of data analysis and presentation in technical reports and
professional journals. Research Option
730. Community Mapping. (B) Macro Practice Elective
Geographic space is important to family and community well-being, as we know. community Mapping
introduces students to geographic information systems (GIS), computer software for making maps and
analyzing spatial data. Students will learn how maps have been used in social welfare history as well
as how GIS can be used for needs assessments, asset mapping, program evaluation, and program
planning. The course builds on research skills developed in SW 715. For the final project, students
have an opportunity to apply their GIS skills to creating maps related to their field placement. The use
of such maps may lead to both program and policy change in neighborhoods and communities.
Maacro Practice Elective
SM 732. Integrative Seminar in Child Welfare. (B) Garcia/Greeson.Prerequisite(s): Acceptance to
the Child Well-Being and Child Welfare Specialization. Clinical and Macro Practice Elective
This capstone course in the Child Well-Being and Child Welfare specialization will integrate direct/
micro and macro levels of practice; research in child welfare and related fields, as the research relates
to all levels of practice; the relationship of child maltreatment and other social problems; and
perspectives from several disciplines, specifically social work, other mental health professions, law,
and medicine, as these disciplines address problems of child maltreatment and child welfare. The
seminar will highlight issues of social justice, disproporionality - particularly the over-representation of
children and families of color in the child welfare system, and disadvantaged populations, including
children in general and poor children in particular. Faculty from other disciplines will be features as
guest speakers throughout the course.

Page 6 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
SM 731. Clinical and Macro Child Welfare Practice. (A) Garcia/Greeson.Prerequisite(s): Acceptance
to the Child Well-Being and Child Welfare Specialization. Clinical and Macro Practice Elective
Students enrolled in this course will learn about the various contexts in which child welfare practice
and policy services take place and the skills and modalities that are used with children, youth, and
families who are the focus of child welfare intervention. Students learn about the social conditions and
unmet needs that have typically precipitated child welfare policy and ideological debates informing
child welfare policy. How to structure organizations and implement planning in support of strengthening
front-line practice is also addressed. Taking stock of these policies and organizational factors, students
gain a firm understanding of how they influence, shape, and govern direct clinical practice in child
protection and casework. Particular attention will be devoted to developing students' practice skills in
safety assessment and safety planning, risk assessment, and permanency planning. Implementation
of evidence-based, trauma-informed interventions to promote positive developmental outcomes
among the racially/ethnically diverse pool of children and adolescents placed in out-of-home care will
also be a focus of attention. Other topics include separation, loss, and identity development;
disproportionality and disparity; and self-care in child welfare practice.
In the spirit of bridging connections between macro and clinical practice, course content will delve
into how direct casework services influence dependency actions in the juvenile courts. How these
direct practices or interventions influence case outcomes as reported by a number of federal data
reporting systems will also be discussed. A social justice framework will be applied to understand how
child welfare policies and organizational services sustain child and family inequalities, especially for
historically oppressed and marginalized populations who are diproportianally represented in the child
welfare system.
736. Building Community Capacity. (C) Macro Practice Elective
This course provides an introduction to community organization and community capacity building. The
course encompasses strategies, models, and techniques for the creation of organizations, the
formation of federations of existing organizations; and coalition-building, all designed to address
problems requiring institutional or policy changes or reallocation of resources to shift power and
responsibility to those most negatively affected by current socio-economic and cultural arrangements.
The course emphasizes development of strategies and techniques to organize low-income minority
residents of urban neighborhoods, and to organize disenfranchised groups across geographic
boundaries as the first required steps in an empowerment process. Macro Practice Elective
738. Anxiety and Depression. (C) Clinical Practice Elective
Anxiety and depression are two of the most common mental disorders seen in social work clients, and
frequently they occur concurrently. This course describes the medical and "physical" concomitants and
psychosocial factors associated with both conditions and introduces diagnostic and assessment
procedures and methods of intervention that social workers use in working with clients with these
conditions. The course also consideers how culture, social class, gender, and other social differences
affect the expression of these disorders and their concomitant treatment. Clinical Practice Elective
739. Introduction to Interdisciplinary Health Care: Collaborative Roles. May be taken
undergraduate juniors and seniors. Permit of the instructor is necessary. Contact the registrar, Nancy
Rodgers, Room B-22, School of Social Work, Caster Building
The course addresses basic issues in interdisciplinary collaboration in the health care field including
communication,role negotiation, and leadership behaviors among the members of the multidisciplinary
team. Case presentation structured exercises, group problem solving, decision making and goal
setting will be utilized to demonstrate the roles and functions of several health disciplines. Students are
introduced to the relationship between the attainment of the tasks of the health care team and its
internal group processes.

Page 7 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
740. Strategic Planning and Resource Development for Public and Nonprofit Organizations. (C)
Macro Practice Elective
Resilient organizations engage in a continuous process of self-review and refocusing. Referred to as
"strategic planning," this process requires the active participation of a broad range of agency
"stakeholders" who, in their work together, seek to realign the organization's goals, structures, and
programs to make them more responsive to the changing needs of their service populations. Building
on the content of foundation pratice foundation courses, "Strategic Planning and Resource
Development" has been designed to strengthen the the student's leadership capacity for engaging in
strategic planning and resource development practice across a broad range of governmental (GOs)
and civil society organizations (CSOs). The importance of organizational flexibility, innovation, and the
creation of cooperative public-private partnerships is emphasized throughtout the course. Macro
Practice Elective
744. Direct Practice Research. (B) Prerequisite(s): SWRK 615 or SWRK 715, Introduction to Social
Work Research. Research Option
This course provides graduate social work students with research knowledge and skills aimed at
enhancing their direct practice with clients. The course examines methods of assessment, methods for
choosing and evaluating techniques of intervention, methods for determining the effectiveness of
practice and the use of research in social work decision-making. A successful outcome of the course
will be that students perceive a more positive relationship between research and social work practice
and possess a set of tools that they will be able to utilize in their future careers as social workers. The
course starts from an assumption that students have some familiarity with research and are primarily
engaged in direct practice with individuals, families or groups.
741. (MSSP741) Gender & Social Policy. (B) Baker.
Gender and Social Policy develops an advanced understanding of social policies through a focus on
social issues and conditions through the lens of gender, economic and critical theory. The specialized
focus on gender and social policy provides students with the opportunity to develop more specialized
knowledge about how market dynamics and government policies respond to the needs and risks faced
by women. Specific emphasis is placed on utilizing theoretical frameworks to evaluate the intersesction
between social policy, history and social science in relationship to gender issues. Students are also
expected to conduct a policy analysis that includes an evaluation of how current and former social
movements surrounding gender issues shaped their policy of interest.
742. Practice with At-Risk Youth. (A) Clinical and Macro Practice Elective; Option for Home and
School Visitor Requirement
The discourse on juvenile justice in the United States,once driven by themes of treatment and
rehabilitation, has been dominated in recent years by vocabularies of punishment and incapacitation.
The juvenile court, an enterprise founded by social reformers and the social work profession at the
turn of the century to "save children," is now under severe political and legislative pressure to impose
harsher penalties on younger and younger offenders who are increasingly portrayed as violent "superpredators," while its most vulnerable segments, children and youth, stand in greatest need of what a
social service system can offer. Not surprisingly, those most likely to wind up under supervision are
economically poor, under-educated, disproportionately of color and disproportionately at-risk to
become victims of violent crimes. How does the profession situate itself in this discourse and what are
individual social workers to do? Clinical and Macro Practice Elective; Home and School Visitor
Requirement Option

Page 8 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
743. Action Research. (B) Prerequisite(s): SWRK715 or SWRK615. Research Option
Action research is a form of social research that combines research with intervention. It is
characterized by a collaborative relationship between the researcher and a client organization that is in
an immediate problematic situation. The research process is directed toward addressing the problem
situation and producing knowledge that contributes to the goals of social science. Action research is
compatible with many of the values and principles of social work. This course also addresses issues of
social work ethics and values encountered by the action researcher.
746. Political Social Work. (B) Macro Practice Elective
This course focuses on the role of social workers and the social work profession in advocacy and the
political arena. It examines the methods of advocacy (e.g., case, class, and legislative) and political
action through which social workers can influence social policy development and community and
institutional change. The course also analyzes selected strategies and tactics of change and seeks to
develop alternative social work roles in the facilitation of purposive change efforts. Topics include
individual and group advocacy, lobbying, public education and public relations, electoral politics,
coalition building, and legal and ethical dilemmas in political action. Macro Practice Elective
748. Microfinance and Women's Empowerment in India. (B) Handy. Application required; $650
program fee
This course examines microfinance and its engagement with marginalized communities such as those
in India. It is designed to provide students with an understanding of the phenomena of microfinance
and its role in poverty alleviation. By studying the use of self-help groups with NGO facilitation, their
impact on women's empowerment will be examined and understood through interaction with women
engaged in microfinance activities.
SM 749. Civil Society Promoting Coexistence in Israel. (L) Application deadline: February 20,
2015
This course offers a unique opportunity to experience the challenges and complexities of coexistence
in Israel, the Holy Land for Christians, Jews and Muslims; a key point of interest and dispute for the
international community, and the homeland shared and claimed by both Israelis and Palestinians. The
course will focus on activities carried out by nonprofit organizations operating within the Israeli civil
society, dealing with issues related to coexistence and to the protection and advancement of the civil
and social rights of different populations, with special emphasis on the Arab-Palestinian population in
Israel. These activities include educational and social services programs, community work and
advocacy activities, aimed at creating dialogues and building coexistence among the different
populations in the Israeli society and Palestine.
758. Faith-Based Practice and Management. (M) Clinical and Macro Practice Elective
This course prepares students to work to existing and newly formed faith-based social service
agencies. It also serves as a national laboratory to extract new knowledge of best practices and the
variability of managing and practicing in faith-based social service agencies. Clinical and Macro
Practice Elective

Page 9 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
755. International Social Work: Practicing in the Global South. Shown.
This interdisciplinary course will introduce students to societal problems in the developing world;
familiarize them with global professions in social work, education, public health, etc.; identify numerous
strategies and skills social workers and other professionals have used to collaboratively build
interventions within the human rights, social welfare, education, health care and sustainable
community development arenas. The course will expose students to views of development as they
relate to individual, interpersonal, family, community, societal and international change. Students will
learn about the history of specific global problems, how cultures affect response, different social
services delivery systems and initiatives aimed at resolution. Students will explore a specific
development issue within a country and community.
756. Human Sexuality. (A) MSW Elective.
The aim of this course is to increase students' ability to deal more comfortably with the sexual aspect
of human functioning. Readings,written assignments, and classroom presentations are directed to
realizing the diversity, complexity, and range of human sexual expression. Current information about
sexuality from the biological and physiological sciences is reviewed to increase comfort and skill in
discussion and handling of sex-related behavior, personal and societal attitudes will be explored. A
variety of sex-related social problems encountered by social workers in family, education, health, and
criminal justice settings are discussed. Diagnostic interviewing and treatment methods are presented
in role play, group exercises and case studies.
757. Loss through the Life Cycle. (B) Clinical Practice Elective
This course considers loss as a central theme throughout the life cycle. Content focuses on the
physical,psychosocial, spiritual, and cultural aspects of loss, dying and bereavement processes and
the interaction among individuals, families and professionals. Students examine historical trends of
family, community, and institutional support for the terminally ill and those experiencing traumatic loss
and learn ways to advocate for a system of services that supports full decision-making on the part of
the client. Course materials, journals, and special projects identify how self and other factors impact
service delivery to individuals,families, and communities experiencing loss, including ethical
considerations prompted by cost, technology, and end of life issues. Clinical Practice Elective
759. Substance Abuse Interventions. (A) Clinical Practice Elective
This course addresses intervention approaches used in social work practice with individuals, families,
and groups who misuse addictive substances themselves or are affected by another's misuse.
Students learn about addictive substances, models of intervention, how to engage and assess clients,
and how to intervene and evaluate the effectiveness of their interventions. The course incorporates
theory and research findings on various strategies of intervention. Clinical Practice Elective
760. Mental Health Diagnostics. (C) Clinical Practice Elective
This course familiarizes students with mental health and mental disorders within the context of the life
cycle, viewed from a biopsychosocial perspective. Prevalent categories of psychiatric disorders are
considered with respect to their differentiating charateristics, explanatory theories, and relevance for
social work practice, according to the DSM and other diagnostic tools. The course includes biological
information and addresses the impact of race, ethnicity, social class, age, gender, and other
sociocultural variables on diagnostic processes.

Page 10 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
761. Spirituality and Social Work Practice. (M) Clinical Practice Elective
This course strives to seek a balance in exploring the universalistic as well as the pluralistic in
relationship to spirituality. Some pluralistic religious and/or spiritual traditions are studied as they
exemplify commitments of spirituality and as they intersect with a more universalistic spirituality. The
course considers how spiritual and religious systems are related to diversity, including gender, social
class, ethnicity and culture, and sexual orientation. Clinical Practice Elective
763. Immigration: Policy & Practice. Chany-Muy. Clinical and Macro Practice Elective
This course will begin with the history of migration to the US, as well as legal definitions of newcomers,
including obtaining documents for lawful permanent residence, refugee status, as well as grounds for
exclusion and deportation, and paths to naturalized citizenship. We will then review how a framework
of cultural competence, and a strength or asset-based approach can inform service to immigrant
clients. The core portion of the course will then focus first on the intersection of immigrants and health,
mental health, employment, crimes, public entitlements, and public education. The course will
conclude with family issues relevant to immigrant families: women, children, lesbian and gay, and
elderly immigrants. Public policy issues will be integrated throughout, and the course will end with
specific suggestions on systems change at various levels. By the end of the course students should be
able to identify strategies for individual clients advocacy (micro); agency and community strategies
(mezzo), and government advocacy (macro) to empower immigrant clients to become full community
participants.
765. Supervision and Leadership in Human Services Organizations. (M) Clinical & Macro
Practice Elective
This course builds on social work knowledge, values, and skills gained in foundation practice courses
and links them to the roles and functions of social workers as supervisors and managers in human
service organizations. Course focus is on providing students with an overview of basic supervisory and
human resource development concepts so they may be better prepared as professional social workers
to enter agencies and provide direct reports (supervisees) with meaningful and appropriate direction,
support, and motivation. Clinical and Macro Practice Elective
768. Social Policy Through Literature. (M) MSW Elective
This course uses works of fiction that pertain to a specific social issue in order to examine the effect
these issues have in human terms on the individual, the family, and the community. Through
appreciation of the human condition as portrayed in literature, students learn to frame issues more
precisely and present arguments in compelling and convincing ways, thus enhancing the role of social
worker as advocate for policy change. MSW Elective
769. Aging: The Intersection of Policy and Practice. (B) Macro Practice Elective; required for
students in the PAC program
This course examines a variety of social welfare policies that affect the rights and interests of older
adults. These include policies related to economic security, health, long term care, and civil rights. In
addition, the course reviews the policy-making process with a discussion of the influence of legislative
sanctions and case law in establishing aging policy in the U.S. The focus of the course is on critical
analysis of the key assumptions driving policy and policy change, e.g. social responsibility vs.
individual responsibility. Finally, the course includes a critical examination of the intersection between
policy and practice, that is, the influence that policy has on the design of interventions and service
delivery practices at the state and local level and the impact of changing policies on communities,
providers, and older adults. Macro Practice Elective

Page 11 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
770. Social Welfare and the Law. (M) MSW Elective
This course helps students understand the ideal and real functions of the law and recognize the
influence of behaviors on the law, and of the law on behaviors. Students have the opportunity to
evaluate strengths and limitations of law for empowering historically disadvantaged populations.
771. Social Work Values and Ethics. MSW Elective
This course is concerned with the influence of idealogy, values, and ethics on the development of
social welfare policies and social work practice. Particular emphasis is given to the impact of such
concepts as freedom,equality, and justice on the creation and implementation of social service
programs and on the underlying value structure of alternative modes of social intervention. The course
also provides students with a framework to understand and apply ethical concepts such as
confidentiality, self-determination, truth-telling, paternalism, conflict of duties, and "whistleblowing," in
the daily realities of professional practice. These concepts and their relationship to terminal values are
taught through the analysis of cases from the changing environment of policy and practice in the
United States.
772. Postcolonial Social Work Practice: International Social Welfare in India. (L) Ghose. Clinical
and Macro Practice Elective
In this course, students examine the global welfare system and its engagement with marginalized
communities. This six-week course in Kolkata, India, centers around a sex workers' collaborative in
Sonagachi, one of Asia's largest red light districts. Interviews with the collaborative's workers and
study of their grassroots movement are combined with class discussions and research projects in
which students engage with texts on HIV, sex work, feminist postcolonial theory and international
social work.
773. Mental Health Challenges in Childhood and Adolescence. (C) MSW Elective
This course will be an opportunity for the student and the instructor to explore the concept
"psychopathology" as it has been and is applied to childhood and adolescence. There are some
psychopathological challenges that are unique to childhood and some which can manifest themselves
throughout childhood into adolescence and adulthood. The social worker/practitioner will encounter a
wide range of symptomatic presentations among his/her clients. At this time in the fields of clinical
social work, psychology, psychiatry, and psychotherapy there are numerous frameworks available to
the practitioner to aid in an understanding of symptoms in children and adolescents. During the next
several weeks three conceptual frameworks will be articulated.
These three frameworks will elucidate the possible meaning, origin, and/or function of the symptoms
and offer to the student a vocabulary with which to engage the situation. At the turn of the 19th century
into the 20th century, psychoanalysis emerged in Europe as a method of understanding symptoms
from the point of view of internal conflict within the child or adolescent. After World War II in the U.S.A.,
a model of understanding symptoms from a systemic/cybernetic point of view revolutionized the
diagnostic processes involved in working with children and adolescents. Since the late 1980's,
postmodern ideas, primarily from Europe and Australia, have greatly influenced and informed the
understanding of psychopathology in children and adolescents. Narrative, social constructivist, and
linguistic usage patterns have become a common vocabulary in the discourse on psychopathology.
This course is not intended to be a reading of the history of child psychopathology. It is intended to
expose the student to the most influential paradigms in the field of child psychopathology.
This MSW elective builds on knowledge of human behavior over the life cycle gleaned from the two
HBSE courses: SWRK 602 and SWRK 612 and the foundation practice courses, SWRK 604 and
SWRK 614. It continues to sensitize students to populations at risk and those affected by racism,
sexism, and other forms of oppression learned across the foundation curriculum. It informs social work
practice with children and adolescents in a variety of settings and practice roles.

Page 12 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
778. Dialectical Behavioral Therapy. (C) Doyle.
In this 5-day intensive course we will examine the underlying theories, empirical foundations, and
fundamental skill sets associated with dialectical behavioral therapy (DBT). Students will be expected
to participate in role plays, lead mindfulness exercises, and carry out chain analyses. Prior to the class
start date, students will have to submit a 15 to 30 page outline of the required text (Linehan, M.M.
(1993), Cognitive-behavioral treatment of borderline personality disorder, Guildford Press) and to
review and complete the study guide for the HBSE text. Students will not be admitted to the first day of
class unless these requirements have been met prior to class. No exceptions; you will be dropped from
the class.
774. Program Evaluation. (B) Prerequisite(s): SWRK 715 or SWRK 615, Introduction to SW
Research. Research Option
This course introduces students to theoretical and practical aspects of social service program
evaluation. Students learn about the design and implementation of all phases of an evaluation, from
needs assessment to analysis of findings. Skills such as survey construction and budgeting are
introduced. Intensive analysis of existing studies illustrates how evaluations are designed and how
findings affect social programs and policy.
775. (PUBH575) Intimate Violence. (M) MSW Elective
The purpose of this course is to familiarize students with the definition, theories, causes, processes,
consequences, and social interventions in intimate violence. The course will attempt to provide insight
on the phenomenon of intimate violence by examining the ways in which it affects survivors,
perpetrators,, and their children. This will be accompolished by reviewing the current research as well
as by exploring how intimate violence is constructed by the participants on the personal, interpersonal,
and social structural level. MSW Elective
777. Cognitive Behavior Therapy. (C) Prerequisite(s): completion of Foundation year curriculum or
equivalent. Clinical Practice Elective.
This course provides students with the skills and techniques for providing cognitive therapy to adults ,
adolescents and children. The course begins with grounding in the cognitive therapy diagnostic
assessment process. Students will be instructed how to use the various cognitive therapy
psychological testing scales. Emphasis is then placed on learning to use the cognitive therapy model
to treat emotional and personality disorders. Students will be taught how to apply cognitive therapy
techniques in both psychotherapy practice as well as in other social work settings such as child
welfare, foster care, case management, aging, and hospital social work. Readings will be augmented
by videotapes, role plays, and observations of cognitive therapy assessments and cognitive therapy
sessions. Clinical Practice Elective

Page 13 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
SM 780. (MSSP780) Policy and "Difference" in Postmodernity. (C) Dixon-Roman. Policy Option
Social constructions of "difference" permeate the institutions, spaces, and assumptions of our society.
These social constructions include but are not limited to the racialized, gendered, sexed, classed, and
dis/abled constructions of the body. By leaning on postmodern thinkers such as Iris Marion Young,
Pierre Bourdieu, Judith Butler, Jacques Derrida, Ernesto Laclau, and Michel Foucault, this seminar
course will begin by engaging the questions of what is "difference" and how is "difference" discursively
constructed and reproduced in society. Using a postmodern lens, the remainder of the course will
engage various social science texts that deal with the varieites of "difference" (i.e. race, gender, class,
sexuality) and the explicit and/or implicit policy implications of these works. Thus, we will critically
engage policies such as welfare, affirmative action, economic policies of taxation, and same-gender
marriage, among others. The underlying questions throughout the course will be to what extend does
social policy enable the possibilities of freedom, justice, and democracy for the "Other", the deviant,
the abject, the marginalized, those of assumed "difference"? And, to what extent does policy constrain
those possibilities at the same time?
781. (PUBH604) Qualitative Research. (B) Prerequisite(s): SWRK 615 or SWRK 715, Introduction to
Social Work Research. Research Option
Qualitative research encompasses a variety of methods that enable the researcher to enter into the
"lived experience" of research participants. These methods are particularly sensitive to the voices of
populations whose perspectives are silenced by dominant societal discourses. The course begins by
giving attention to underlying philosophical issues and traditions of qualitative research and proceeds
to examine qualitative research design, methods of data collection, strategies to ensure rigor, data
analysis, and presentation of findings. Students will learn about research interviewing, focus groups,
and participant observation and ways in which qualitative research can be used to inform and evaluate
social work practice and programs. Students will have the opportunity to apply qualitative research
methods to in-class activities and individual or group projects.
785. Criminal Justice Policies: Implications for Social Work. (C) Policy Option
The United States prison population has risen more than three hundred percent in the last three
decades. More people are currently incarcerated than at any other point in the history of the United
States, and that of the world. This unprecedented period of incarceration has gone largely invisible
although it represents one of the greatest social epidemics in the history of the United States. This
course provides a critical analysis of the criminal justice system in the United States from a historical
and contemporary perspective. It examines the implications of significant criminal justice policies such
as the Rockefeller Drug Laws, 3-Strike Legislations, and Mandatory Minimums on the current state of
incarceration, and the phenomenon of "Reentry" and "Recidivism". The intersections of criminal justice
and social work practice are unmistakable when examining staples of social work practice such as
homelessness, mental health and substance abuse, thus the course is intended to facilitate a more
informed/holistic practice for all social work students.

Page 14 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
793. (NURS640, PUBH551) Global Health and Health Policy. (M) MSW Elective
This participatory interdisciplinary seminar course examines contemporary issues in public health
policy and global health. The organizing framework is social determinants of health. We consider
evidence that inequalities in education, income, and occupation influence health status, and the policy
dilemma that broad interventions to improve population health may increase health disparities. We
critically examine whether prevention is always better than cure, and what modern medicine has to
offer in terms of health. We explore the public policy process in health using the "tobacco wars" as a
case example, of how politics, policy, law, commercial interests, and research intersect to affect the
public's health. We examine whether global health is in a state of decline, and the extent to which
failures in public health, public policy, and foreign policy have contributed to increasing threats to world
health. Likewise we will examine the potential for greater integration of health into foreign policy to
create global infrastructure upon which to advance health. We will examine the global health workforce
and the impact of widespread global migration of health professionals on receiving and sending
countries.
There are no prerequisites. The course is designed for graduate students in the social and
behavioral sciences, health professions, public health, business and law. Advanced undergraduate
students will be admitted with permission.
786. Social Work Practice & Trauma. (C) Abrams. Clinical Practice Elective
This course integrates trauma theory and practice and expands practice knowledge to include the
treatment and assessment of the survivors of trauma. Emphasis is placed on differentiating PTSD from
Complex Trauma in order to identify appropriate, evidence-based intervention strategies. Topics
covered in the course include an historical overview of the development of our understanding of
trauma and the exploration of various types of trauma includeing war trauma, domestic violence,
childhood sexual and physical abuse, natural disasters, the experiences of political refugees and
organizational trauma. Among the interventions covered in this course are CBT, EMDR, group and
psychodynamic treatment. Students will consider issues that affect those treating the survivors of
trauma, such as vicarious trauma, and will explore approaches to self-care. This is an advanced
clinical course. Through assignments and class discussions, students are encouraged to use their
experiences in the field to deepen their understanding of the material covered in the course.
SM 788. Harm Reduction on the Borders: Substance Use and HIV Treatment in Puerto Rico. (L)
This course examines the U.S.-based substance use and HIV treatment systems, and its engagement
with injection drug users in Fajardo, Puerto Rico. It is designed to provide the students with an
understanding of the political economy of harm reduction initiatives, and the manner in which it is
shaped by the complicated relationship between Puerto Rico and the U.S. Students are expected to
gain an understanding of Pureto Rico's welfare environment, the role of social welfare and social
workers in such a context, and the interweaving of social control and social change embedded in
welfare initiatives in "borderlands" such as Fajardo. During the four week course in Fajardo, students
will complete a placement in a needle exchange program, and engage with texts on HIV, substance
use, postcolonial theory and international social work.

Page 15 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
792. Psychodynamic Theory. (B) Abrams. Clinical Practice Elective
The purpose of this course is to review the evolution of psychodynamic theory and consider key
concepts in psychoanalysis, ego psychology, object relations theory, self-psychology, attachment
theory, relational and intersubjective theories and current findings in cognitive neuroscience.
Participants will explore human psychological functioning as explained by these various
psychodynamic theories and through the biopsychosocial lens that informs social work practice.
Students will examine how external factors such as race, class, gender, culture and biology are
interwoven with often unconscious, internal psychological determinants, creating the complexities of
human behavior that challenge us in our clinical work. Case presentations by students, the instructor
and guest lecturers will demonstrate how concepts from psychodynamic theory can be applied to
social work practice with diverse clients in varied settings.
794. Practice with Older Adults and Families. (A) Clinical Practice Elective
This course focuses on practice with older adults and families within a life course and resiliency
perspective. It examines the nature of the aging process, needs and life issues, the ways in which
persons adapt to changes, and the ways in which interventions may assist with these adaptations.
Students learn assessment, case management, and intervention skills, including the use of rapid
assessment and diagnositc tools, needed to work effectively with older populations and family
caregivers in a variety of community-based and institutional settings. The course emphasizes
evidence-based practices that enhance quality of life, dignity, respect for differences, and maximum
independent functioning. Clinical Practice Elective
798. Advanced Topics. (C)
Titles and Topics vary. See department website for descriptions: http://www.sp2.upenn.edu/programs/
msw/courses.html

Social Welfare PhD courses
796. Family Economic Mobility. (B) MSW Elective
In this course, the experiences and voices of mothers, fathers, children, employers, children's school
teachers, human service workers, educators, trainers, and other in cities across America graphically
illustrate "real life" urban poverty and its two remedies: welfare and work. In the context of popular
beliefs and individual and institutional practices, these voices dramatically sho how poverty, welfare,
and work intsersect to perpetuate economic inequality for most low-income working families. The labor
market, welfare and workforce programs, public schools and social policies are some of the main
American (and global) institutions implicated in this intersection. concepts such as the "work ethic,"
"family-friendly workplace," and "good jobs" are deconstructed in terms of their meaning for today's
families, organizations and policies.
At base, this course examines occupational mobility in America within the broad framework of
capitalism, democaracy, race, ethnicity, and traditional gender roles. Students read classic and
contemporary literature from occupational social work, sociology, cultural anthropology, and political
science to explore generative roles for "meso-oriented" clinical, macro and policy professionals.

Page 16 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
803. History and Philosophy of Social Welfare. Stern. PhD students only
This seminar traces the evolution of social welfare from ancient to modern times focusing on its
implications for the development of contemporary social welfare in the United States. The course
examines the development of social welfare systems and the underlying philosophies inthe context of
the social, economic, political, and cultural environments in which they emerged. Topics include the
evolution of modern conceptions of the "welfare state,"the role of public, private and voluntary sectors
in the social services, trends in social and family history and their relationship to social welfare, the
professionalization of social work, and methods of historical and social policy analysis.
811. Social Theory. (C)
Course reading consists of the original works of theorists who offer classical, contemporary and
postmodern perspectives on social thought, social interaction and issues germane to social welfare.
Through intensive examination of multiple theoretical frameworks, students are expected to increase
their analytical and critical orientation to theory. This ore nuanced understanding about epistemology,
underlying assumptions, and theory construction can then be used to inform the student's substantive
field of study and methodological orientation to research. This course is conducted in mixed lectureseminar format. Students have the opportunity to practice pedagogical techniques and exercise class
leadership.
852. Social Work Research. (A) Prerequisite(s): Completion of concurrent enrollment in a course on
introductory Social Statistics.
This is the foundation course in social work research. It deals with the nature of scientific inquiry;
theory and its relation to research design and hypothesis testing; and various models of data
collection, sampling, and analysis of research and is supported in following personal interests within
the structure of ethical scientific research. Each student prepares an original study which
demonstrates integration of the semester's work. Students learn to work on their own. At the end of
SWRK 852, they are prepare dfor more advanced coursework in research.
853. Qualuative Research. (B) Prerequisite(s): SWRK 852 or an equivalent.
This course offers the advanced graduate student an in-depth study of the theory and methods of
interpretive qualitative inquiry. Topics include the philosophic assumptions and positions within
qualitative research, design issues and alternatives, data collection methods, data sources, sampling,
criteria for rigor, data analysis, and reporting strategies. Special attention will be given to grounded
theroy, ethnography, and the analysis of interviews, as well as methods of identifying and engaging
hidden populations. Students will have the opportunity to use qualitative research strategies in class
and in field assignments. This course is intended for doctoral students in the social sciences. Master's
students will be admitted with permission.
855. Advanced Research Methods. (B) Prerequisite(s): SWRK852 and Introduction to Statistics.
The methodology of accountability research in human service programs is studied. Emphasis is placed
on social program evaluation, idiographic research, and secondary data analysis in policy research as
specialized methods of social work research. Students undertake a laboratory experience in an
ongoing program evaluation project.

Page 17 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
861. Policy Analysis. (B) Prerequisite(s): Must have successfully completed a course in multivariate
statistics.
This course examines alternative models of policy development and applies them to current issues in
social welfare. It emphasizes frameworks for policy research and secondary analysis of governmental
data. Topics include: race, class, and sex in policy outcomes; major social welfare programs; and the
design, implementation, and evaluation of social service systems.
899. Independent Study.
Independent studies may be arranged on an individual or small group basis between students and a
faculty member. The learning objectives associated with independent studies are highly specializaed
and must relate directly to the student's individualized educational plan. Students, with the faculty
member, share responsibility for the design, structure and content of an independent study. No more
than two independent studies may be arranged for an individual student.
804. Methods of Inquiry:Quantitative Research Methods. Prerequisite(s): Must be enrolled in
D.S.W. program.
The purpose of this course is to teach the basics of practice research, with an emphasis on
intervention research. This course will focus on research ethics, building a conceptual framework,
source credibility, question and hypothesis formulation, design, design, sampling, measurement, and
scale construction and selection. Special emphasis will be placed on the development of designing
feasible and practical research studies to answer questions of importance to social work practice. The
course will emphasize the selection and development of outcome measures, intervention manuals,
and fidelity measures. It will closely e xamine the use and development of practice guidelines,
evidence-based practice and meta-analytic procedures.
968. Social Welfare and Social Economics.
This course examines the social welfare aspects of major economic decisions in the United States.
Particular attention is paid to exploring the implications of social choices in relation to the goals of the
achievement of increased equity and equality in the distribution of income and power, the elimination o
unemployment, and the control of inflation. The growth of public welfare programs and the base of
funding for social services are examined in terms of the nation's economic and political objectives.
995. Doctoral Dissertation.
Doctoral Dissertation

Clinical Doctorate in Social Work courses
805. Methods of Inquiry:Qualitative Research Methods. Prerequisite(s): SWRK804-001. Must be
enrolled in D.S.W. program.
This course will cover the essentials of qualitative research. Students will learn how to "situate
themselves" in the research process so as to best capture the lived experience of the subjects under
investigation. The course will explore the appropriate use of intensive interviews, grounded theory and
ethnography. Mixed methods that employ both qualitative and quantitative approaches, will also be
covered.

Page 18 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
812. Clinical Theory I. Prerequisite(s): Enrolled in D.S.W. program.
The purpose of this course is to broaden and deepen participants' mastery of several theories of
development, personality, and behavior that have contributed to social work's knowledge base across
the decades and continue to inform clinical social work epistemology today. Drawing primarily from
original sources, we will consider key assumptions, constructs, and propositions of each theory in
terms of its congruence with social work's principles, values, and mission and in relation to the
profession's person-in-environment perspective. In this first semester, we will study the evolution of
theories central to psychodynamic thought, from Freud's early biological model of the mind, through
various relational perspectives, to contemporary work in the fields of attachment and interpersonal
neurobiology. This examination will constitute a case study of the manner in which theories are socially
constructed and will lay the foundation for critical inquiry into the social and political biases inherent in
the Western European intellectual tradition from which most theories of human behavior have
emerged.
813. Clinical Theory II. Prerequisite(s): SWRK812. Must be enrolled in D.S.W. program.
This course critically examines theories, perspectives, and frameworks informing clinical social work
practice. These theoretical perspectives provide means for practitioners to understand a client or client
system in context and offer strategies for intervention. The course begins by considering the
development of social work practice theory thematically and from a historical perspective. Practice
theories that have contributed to the knowledge base of clinical social work practice will be examined
within the social, political, and ideological contexts of their times and against the backdrop of the
development of the profession. The course will explore debates within the profession (e.g., art vs.
science; empirical practice vs. constructivism; what constitutes professionalism) and in related fields
(modernism vs. postmodernism) and evaluate the discourse on these topics. As the course moves into
contemporary times, recent developments in clinical social work practice theory will be examined.
Attention will be paid to factors that influence clinical social work practice now and are likely to
influence the profession in the future.
SM 900. Clinical DSW. Staff.Prerequisite(s): Must be enrolled in D.S.W. program.
Topics vary; see dapartment for current course descriptions
SM 920. CLINICAL PRACTICE I.
SM 921. CLINICAL PRACTICE II.

Master of Science in Social Policy Courses (MSSP)
SM 514. (PSCI414) Comparative Politics of the Welfare State.
This class explores the origins, development, and possible futures of social policy regimes in the
industrialized countries, in the context of broader political and historical trends. Topics include
pensions, health care, and poverty alleviation; "families" of welfare states; the relationship between
labor markets and social policy; feminist and Marxist critiques of welfare states and welfare state
studies. Open to graduate students and qualified undergraduates with permission of the instructor.

Page 19 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
630. Quantitative Reasoning/Social Statistics. (A) Prerequisite(s): Enrolled in MSSP program or
permission of instructor.
The primary goals of this course are (1) to provide students with a solid understanding of the logic of
social science research as well as (2) o provide students with an introduction to a broad range of
statistical methods commonly used in social science research. The first portion of the semester
concentrates on defining research problems, research design (including sampling, measurement, and
causal inference), and assessing research quality. The latter portion of the semester focuses upon
data analysis including descriptive statistics, measures of association for categorical and continuous
variables, introduction to t-tests, ANOVA and regression, and the language of data analysis. Students
will learn how to choose and apply statistical tools to data sources, how to interpret quantitative
studies, and will gain experience using SPSS - a statistical software package..
628. Policy: Analysis of Issues, Strategy and Process. (C) Prerequisite(s): Enrolled in MSSP
program or permission of instructor.
Policy analysis requires an understanding of social problems/social issues and the processes by which
policy is developed and implemented. Critical skills in many policy frameworks include: problem
definition and analysis, review of relevant research, identification of possible actions, implementation
and evaluation, and fiscal analysis. Competency in written and oral communication is also essential. To
develop these and related skills, this course utilizes as a base a dynamic social problem analysis
framework that addresses issues of equity, equality and adequacy. It also examines multiple theoretical
and analytical perspectives. Through the review of contemporary and historical social policy debates
and provisions, selected case examples and policy briefs, this course provides students with an
understanding of the policy roles of the legislative and executive branches of government, including
goal setting, policy rulemaking and enactment, allocation of resources, financing, regulation, and
implementation. The policy process at state and local levels of government will also be addressed. The
primary focus is on U.S. policy although global policies will be discussed when relevant.
629. Research and Evaluation Design. (B) Prerequisite(s): Enrolled in MSSP program or permission
of instructor.
Research and Evaluation Design introduces social research methods in the context of social policy
and program evaluation. The course provides a conceptual and practical understanding in the design
of experimental, quasi-experimental, and non-experimental research and in the application of
quantitiative and qualitative methods. Students learn about the application of the research process and
skills in all phases of assessing a social policy and developing a social program, including needs
assessment, implementation analysis, and evaluation of policy or program effectiveness. Students
learn to be critical and informed consumers of research and to apply quidelines of research ethics in
social policy settings.
631. Law and Social Policy. (B) Prerequisite(s): Must be registered in Masters in Social Policy
program or permission of instructor.
This course introduces students to the basics of the American legal system, focusing on the interplay
between litigation and social policy. Students will learn how law, and particularly case law, is made,
how to read case law and evaluate precedent, legal reasoning and argument. This course will utilize
various teaching methods including introducation to the "Socratic" lecturing method which is frequently
utilized in the study of law. Students will also study the structure of court systems at both state and
federal levels as well as the litigation process and the role of law and courts in shaping and addressing
social policy issues. Students will also learn the basics of several areas of substantive law, with an eye
toward consideration of how that law has been, and can be, used to effect social change.

Page 20 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
632. Capstone Seminar. (B) Prerequisite(s): Enrolled in MSSP program.
The focus of the Capstone Seminar is three-fold: 1) to enhance student integration of the theory and
practice of social policy analysis; 2) to enhance the student's competencies in the written and oral
communication processes and procedures necesary for the policy world; and 3) to ensure basic
knowledge about federal budget processes, stakeholder roles, and inter-organizational collaboration.
Capstone II consists of an intensive, multi-week policy internship that is selected through a
consultative process involving the student, MSSP advisors, internship coordinator/advisor, and
mentors/supervisors at potential sites. The internship provides an opportunity for the student to expand
horizons beyond the academic. It serves as a medium to integrate classroom learning with
experiences in policy making activity.
668. Economics for Social Policy. (A) Corequisite(s): Students must register for lecture section
(001) and ALL 4 corresponding seminar sections (301-304).
This course provides students with theory and tools from the field of economics that are useful for the
field of social policy, such as: 1) critical macroeconomic and microeconomic concepts for social policy
formation and anaylsis; 2) information about the Congressional budget process and federal budget,
U.S. and global monetary policy, economic measurement indices, and tax policy in relation to social
policy values of equity, equality and adequacy; 3) how to apply cost-benefit analysis and/or costeffectiveness analysis to policy proposals; and 4) the role of nonprofit organizations in the provision of
social services and programs that are mandated by federal legislation.
SM 780. (SWRK780) Policy and "Difference" in Postmodernity. Dixon-Roman.
Social constructions of "difference" permeate the institutions, spaces, and assumptions of our society.
These social constructions include but are not limited to the racialized, gendered, sexed, classed, and
dis/abled constructions of the body. By leaning on postmodern thinkers such as Iris Marion Young,
Pierre Bourdieu, Judith Butler, Jacques Derrida, Ernesto Laclau, and Michel Foucault, this seminar
course will begin by engaging the questions of what is "difference" and how is "difference" discursively
constructed and reproduced in society. Using a postmodern lens, the remainder of the course will
engage various social science texts that deal with the varieites of "difference" (i.e. race, gender, class,
sexuality) and the explicit and/or implicit policy implications of these works. Thus, we will critically
engage policies such as welfare, affirmative action, economic policies of taxation, and same-gender
marriage, among others. The underlying questions throughout the course will be to what extend does
social policy enable the possibilities of freedom, justice, and democracy for the "Other", the deviant,
the abject, the marginalized, those of assumed "difference"? And, to what extent does policy constrain
those possibilities at the same time?
670. Education, Society, and Social Policy. (B)
This course is concerned with interrogating the dualism of schools and society that has been an ongoing discourse in philosophy, research, and policy. In education policy, in particular, the question of
the educative experiences that go on beyond schooling have been slow to be taken up and often
relegated to public and social policy. And due to the siloes of policymaking and implementation there
has been very little dialogue or collaborative design between education and social policy, leaving major
gaps in the experience and process of education and human development. This course will begin by
looking at how educational philosophy and theory has taken up this dualism beginning with Nietzche,
Dewey, Durkheim, and Marx, through Ivan Illich, Larry Cremin, Jean Lave, Edmund Gordon, and
Herve Varenne. Then, we will survey various social and educational research that examine the various
spaces outside of schooling that matter for human learning and development including the Coleman
Report, and work on poverty, education, and human development. The third part of the course will
explore both actual and proposed policy models to address a much broader understanding of
education such as Head Start, the Harlem Children's Zone, 21st Century Community Learning
Centers, The Broader Bolder Approach, and other supplementary and comprehensive educational
services and

Page 21 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
710. Democratizing Data: Analytics for Social Change. (M)
With the advent of digital technologies nad the increasing power of computational analytics, the
proliferation and ubiquity of data production has increased at exponential rates enabling new
possibilites for social analysis. This course will examine the emergence of democratizing data -- the
movement to make government and other data more widely or publicly available and its potential
enabling for democratic possibilities. The types of data being made available, through various analytic
systems, and the ways in which their accessibility and inaccessibility is contributing to reconfigured
power relations, will be described. The paradigmatic tensions and shifts that have emerged in the
debates on "Big Data," such as deductive versus inductive reasoning and the challenges posed to
statistical sampling theory, will be interrogated. The appropriation of machine learning and predictive
analytic algorithms for social analysis will be critically explored. Issues related to the ethical and legal
use of administrative data, particularly data related to patient, client, student, and taxpayer information
will be considered, as well as from internet-based sources including social media. Potential solutions
to data security challenges will be additionally considered.
Methods for web-scraping of data, analysis of web traffic data, and the use of social networking data
in the modeling of social phenomena and public opinion will be examined. Students will learn how to
make results accessible to non-technical audiences via data visualization tools, such as web-based
data dashboards and web-based maps. These topics will be discussed for the analysis of health,
education, and social policy as well as their implications for questions pertaining to race, gender, class,
sexuality, dis/abilities, age and youth culture. This course will develop students' knowledge of
computational and data analytics and its applications for social policy analysis.
741. (SWRK741) Gender & Social Policy. (B) Baker.
Gender and Social Policy develops an advanced understanding of social policies through a focus on
social issues and conditions through the lens of gender, economic and critical theory. The specialized
focus on gender and social policy provides students with the opportunity to develop more specialized
knowledge about how market dynamics and government policies respond to the needs and risks faced
by women. Specific emphasis is placed on utilizing theoretical frameworks to evaluate the intersesction
between social policy, history and social science in relationship to gender issues. Students are also
expected to conduct a policy analysis that includes an evaluation of how current and former social
movements surrounding gender issues shaped their policy of interest.
SM 560. Social Media for Social Change. Half credit
Nonprofit organizations have been some of the first adopters of social media tools, and they are
increasingly turning to the use of social media to fulfill a range of communications, outreach, and
marketing needs. This half credit course will introduce students to the importance of understanding the
online space and how it can enhance the work of every nonprofit organization. Students will begin to
develop an understanding and awareness of core platforms and tools along with the importance of
metrics, feedback loops, and taking an iterative approach based on social media best practices.

Page 22 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
897. Applied Linear Modeling. (B) Prerequisite(s): Introductory Graduate Statistics.
This course deals with the underlying assumptions and applications of the general linear model with
social science, education, and social policy related questions/data. The first half of the course begins
by covering simple linear regression and the assumptions of the general linear model, assumption
diagnostics, consequences of violation, and how to correct for violated assumptions. This will also
include methods of incomplete case analysis (i.e. missing data analysis . Then various aspects of
regression analysis with multiple independent variables will be covered including categorical
explanatory variables (e.g. to estimate group differences), interaction effects, mediating effects (e.g. to
estimate the indirect effect of social processes), and non-linear effects. The course will then cover
some of the applications of the general(ized) linear model including logistic regression, some elements
of path modeling (structural equation modeling), multilevel analysis (hierarchical linear modeling), and
longitudinal modeling (growth modeling). The course will be taught using SAS, but students are
welcome to use any statistical package of comfort. Pre-requisite: Introductory Graduate Statistics.

Master of Nonprofit Leadership Courses (NPLD)
510. Social Innovation. (B) Frumkin. Open to graduate and undergraduate students
This is a class focused on understanding how innovation plays a central role in public problem solving.
We will explore how social entrepreneurs develop their ideas, define intended impact, market their
solutions, understand competition, and collaborate with other actors. At the end of the course, students
will have mastered a set of conceptual tools that will allow them to be effective problem solvers in
diverse settings throughout their careers. The course has five core objectives: 1.To introduce students
to the concepts and practices of social entrepreneurship; 2.To introduce students to the components of
a successful social enterprise; 3.To equip students with the tools to be able to accurately identify and
assess innovation and impact in social enterprises; 4.To train students to view the world from a
perspective of social innovation; and 5.To empower students to develop their own innovative solutions
to difficult social problems around the world.
561. Nonprofit Branding. Rhode. half credit course
This course will provide the tools and framework for helping to understand the role that marketing and
brand building can play in the non-profit sector. As such, we will create a shared understanding of the
key concepts that help define branding and the classic elements of marketing that will serve as a
foundation for discussion and analysis throughout the semester. We will identify the fundamental
differences that non-profit organizations face in building their brands and how those challenges differ
from tradition/for profit brand building. We will identify tools and frameworks that brands/organizations
can use to help design and implement marketing strategy. We will utilize current and relevant case
studies that help demonstrate the core concepts of this course.

Page 23 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
562. (Almost) Everything You Need to Know About Nonprofit Law. Kramer.
This half credit course will provide a basic understanding of the law that applies to nonprofit
organizations, with an emphasis on the law affecting 501(c)(3)public charities. It will focus on ways to
obtain and maintain federal tax exempt status, including issues of private inurements and private
benefit, limits on advocacy, lobbying and electioneering, unrelated business income tax, and excess
benefits taxes. It will show how legal structure and governance procedures affect the answer to the
questions "Whose Organization Is It?" Students will review bylaws of multiple organizations to see how
differeces in structure reflect the great diversity of nonprofits and why "one size does not fit all" within
the sector. They will learn how to avoid bad legal drafting that can create problems for dysfunctional
organizations.
The course will explain the fiduciary duty of officers and directors, explore the extent of potential
personal liability, and review necessary insurance and indemnification. It will review Form 990 publicly
available tax returns of multiple nonprofits to see why a tax return may be a nonprofit's most important
public relations document. It will also review the basics of charitable giving through a mock meeting of
university development officers, outline the concepts of planned giving, and discuss the requirements
for charitable solicitation regitration at the state level. It will explain the legal requirements for
maintaining endowments and discuss a series of ethical issues that can face nonprofit executives and
their lawyers.
Students will receive one year of free access to Don Kramer's Nonprofit Issues website, and will
emerge with a better understanding of key legal issues facing the nonprofit sector that regularly make
the news.
563. Raising Philanthropic Capital. Hagin.
Americans gave more than $350 billion to nonprofit organizations last year, the highest total ever
recorded. Now, more than ever, it is crucial that nonprofit leaders master the art and science of raising
philanthropic capital. Participants in this innovative class will: 1) acquire an understanding of the
nonprofit funding landscape; 2) learn proven and creative strategies to secure investments; 3) gain the
experience of giving and motivating charitable commitments; and 4) receive peer evaluation and
professional consulting feedback. This experiential and interactive learning course will provide students
an opportunity to evaluate a nonprofit organization endeavoring to attract voluntary support, and coach
students to think through and develop the ideas, skills, and tools required to participate personally in
today's philanthropic market.
582. NGOs and International Development. Thompson.
The course will offer a broad perspective on international development, aid, and the roles of NGOs
and social enterprises. The latter half of the course will focus on issues in NGO management:
fundraising, staff (expatriate and local), monitoring, and evaluation (including randomized controlled
trials). The course is aimed at students with no to moderate experience in international development,
but students with extensive work experience with NGOs or development work are also welcome.
This course is organized around two motivating questions: 1) How do we understand the process of
development, and what is the NGO's role to be in it? 2) If NGOs can meaningfully contribute to
development, what are the exemplar and cutting edge practices for NGO management?

Page 24 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
570. Nonprofit Planning & Finance. Burd.
This spring semester financial budgeting course for nonprofit organizations will focus on strategic
issues in nonprofit finance, specifically on capitalization strategies that position nonprofits for greater
impact. The foundation of these goals is understanding and applying appropriate budgeting principles
and best practices in internal organizational systems. Students will have exposure to a varitey of
budgeting scenarios including annual operating budgets and zero-based budgeting, program
profitability, new facility planning, and transformational growth. The class will utilize a variety of
teaching tools: case studies, hands-on budget analysis and development, student applied study with a
nonprofit organization, and guest speakers. This course on financial budgeting is open to all graduate
and professional school students who have a familiarity of the principles of nonprofit finance.
580. Effective Goverance Practices for Nonprofits. (A) Shmavonian. .5 cu course
Effective governance relies upon consistent and ethical board leadership, yet nonprofit organizations
that exemplify truly model governance are few and far between. This course introduces students to
broad frameworks of governance, but will focus most deeply on the human dimensions of board
leadership. In particular, we will examine real examples and cases of moral and ethical dilemmas
faced by nonprofit boards and executive leaders, and the nuanced practices required to achieve
effective board governance. This will involve a careful look at several real cases, as well as guest
lectures from 3-4 different nonprofit board and CEO leaders. The invited leaders will use their own
experiences to guide students through some of the most challenging ethical and managerial situations
that can be encountered, with the goal of providing a practical grounding for students who expect to
contribute to nonprofit leadership in their careers - either as executive staff or as board members.
Fall 2016 class dates: 8/31, 9/12, 9/19, 10/10, 10/24, 11/7; 5:00-8:00PM
581. Effective Governance Practices for Nonprofits. (B) Shmavonian. .5 cu course
Effective governance relies upon consistent and ethical board leadership, yet nonprofit organizations
that exemplify truly model governance are few and far between. This course introduces students to the
broad framework of fiduciary, strategic and generative governance but will focus most deeply on the
human dimensions of board leadership. In particular, we will examine real examples and cases of
moral and ethical dilemmas faced by nonprofit boards and executive leaders, and the nuanced
practice required to achieve effective board governance. This will involve a careful look at several real
cases, as well as guest lectures from 3-4 different nonprofit board and CEO leaders. The invited
leaders will use their own experiences to guide students through some of the most challenging ethical
and managerial situations that can be encountered, with the goal of providing a practical grounding for
students who expect to contribute to nonprofit leadership in their careers - either as executive staff or
as board members. The course will include the review of 4-5 cases, readings, 2-3 brief student
presentations, a team project and one final individual project.
This course complements another half-credit course that was offered in fall 2014 (NPLD 580),
Nonprofit Governing Boards. While there is some continuity between the two semesters (both build
upon the Chait, Ryan, Taylor frameworks set out in Governance as Leadership), each class may be
taken independently as a half-credit course. The spring class offers a deeper, more interactive probe
into the elements of governance that arise in real practice, animated by dynamic nonprofit leaders
sharing their experiences. Each course is targeted toward students who are interested in pursuing
non-profit board or executive leadership roles, and will be coordinated with the Wharton Nonprofit
Board Leadership Program (NBLP).

Page 25 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
587. Building Nonprofits that Thrive. Myers.
This course is designed for interdisciplinary students with an enthusiastic interest in cultivating
flourishing organizations, engaged stakeholders, and inspiring leaders across sectors and especially
within nonprofits. Over the past several years, the field of Positive Organizational Scholarship (POS)
has proliferated, yielding a compelling body of knowledge on how and when people thrive at work. This
course focuses on both the theoretical and practical insights that can be gained from cutting-edge
POS research and applied to help practitioners enrich people's experiences at work. Special attention
is placed on how this widsom applies not only across sectors but also specifically to the nonprofit
organizational context. Key topics of study include: aligning leadership values, motivation and giving
behaviors, facilitation tactics, appreciative inquiry, building high quality connections, job crafting and
meaning at work, real-world application.
In particular, the learning objectives of the course provide students with: 1) Knowledge of cuttingedge POS research and leadership practices; 2) Ability to identify opportunities to use positive
leadership practices in the workplace to enhance stakeholder engagement, individual and
organizational performance, and collective impact; 3) Tools for applying positive leadership concepts in
nonprofits, as well as all other organizational domains (e.g. business, government, coaching, the
family, etc.); 4) Consulting experience with a local non-profit, including group projects of research and
assessment that culminate in presenting to the non-profit organizations strategic recommendations for
future success; 5) Techniques and real-life practice in using positive leadership concepts to enrich
one's own career, relationships, and life.
590. (NPLD790) Social Finance. (A) Lamas. The course is open to students across the University. All
graduate students who take this course must register under NPLD 790. All undergraduate students
must register under NPLD 590.
Economic analysis and financial accounting are like languages: fluency comes with practice. In-class
review of case studies (including in-person discussions with the representatives of diverse agencies
and organizations featured in the case studies) will enable students to test and develop their capacity
for applying conceptual tools and analytical methods to sometimes messy and always complicated,
real-life situations.
The course objective is to develop theoretical understanding, critical judgment, and practical skills
for sensitive and effective engagement with financial and economic matters of significance. Students
will learn: (a) different ways of thinking about the economic foundations of social policy, (b) the basic
terminology, tools, and methods for analyzing the financial statements of a wide range of
organizations, and (c) accounting procedures for evaluating business, government, and organizational
operations, policies, and practices.
This course is at once macro and micro in its orientation: It provides a conceptual basis - derived
from mainstream and alternative perspectives - for thinking about the economic dimensions of human
development and social policy, and it introduces a set of core competencies for leadership and
financial management of organizations, including conventional enterprises, consulting firms, research
institutions, governmental agencies, philanthropies, cooperatives, and other third-sector organizations.

Page 26 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
589. Ethics and the Pursuit of Social Impact. (A) Handy.
Leaders of organizations must often make difficult decisions that pit the rights of one set of
stakeholders against another. Having multiple stakeholders or bottom-lines brings with it challenges
when conflicts arise, with the perennial question of whose rights/benefits prevail? What trade-offs need
to be made between multiple bottom lines? Does the mission of the organization prevail over the
privileges of employees/clients? To what extent can large donors influence the mission of the
organization? What is an appropriate social return on investment? This course will introduce the
factors that influence moral conduct, the ethical issues that arise when pursuing social goals, and
discuss the best ways to promote ethical conduct within such organizations. The course will use
specific case studies, real and hypothetical, to analyze a variety of ethical issues that arise (including
finance, governance, accountability, fundraising, labor (paid and unpaid), client groups, and service
provision) among the multiple stakeholders. This course is offered in the fall semester and will
conclude by discussing ways that organizations can prevent and correct misconduct, develop a spirit
of ethical behavior and institutionalize ethical values in the organization's culture.
591. Change Making: Personal Traits and Professional Skills. (L) Sherman.
Over the past decade, researchers have identified some of the key skills that people need to succeed
in their work and in their lives. These are skills that anyone can develop with practice. In this class, we
will teach three of the key skills: resilience (the ability to thrive in difficult times); creativity (the ability to
come up with innovative solutions to problems); and productivity (the ability to make the best use of
your time and find life balance).
This summer session will take place through dynamic, interactive workshops. During the first
session we will learn the key skills. Over the course of the next three weeks, we will practice these
skills to see significant improvement in important areas of our daily lives. By the final day of class, we
will talk about how to sustain these gains in our personal and professional lives long after the course
has ended.
Summer 2016 meeting times: June 4-5, June 11-12, June 25-26, 10am-5pm
592. Collaboration across Sectors. (B) Ren.
Across the world, leaders of organizations from business, nonprofit, and government sectors
increasingly recognize the necessity of "working across boundaries" by developing various forms of
collaboration. Collaboration across sectors has become more prevalent, important, and complicated.
This course will help graduate students understand the theory, policy, and practice of across-sector
collaboration. Students will learn the purposes collaborations may serve, the forms they take, what
skills and techniques are required, and the steps involved in initiating, sustaining, and evolving them.
Students will also learn the characteristics of the three sectors, the roles and contributions each can
make to successful collaborations, and the competitive forces that are often at work in the collaborative
processes and their possible implications. The course is open to all graduate students and sophomore,
junior, and senior undergraduates.

Page 27 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
593. Design Thinking for Social Impact. (L) Lidgus.
Thinking like a designer can transform the way people and organizations develop products, services,
processes, and strategy. This approach, called design thinking, brings together what is desirable from
a human point of view with what is technologically feasible and economically viable. It also allows
people who aren't trained as designers to use creative tools to address a vast range of challenges.
Design thinking is a deeply human process that taps into abilities we all have but get overlooked by
more conventional problem-solving practices. It relies on our ability to be intuitive, to recognize
patterns, to construct ideas that are emotionally meaningful as well as functional, and to express
ourselves through means beyond words or symbols.
Sarah Lidgus, a writer and strategist with the design firm IDEO and, formerly the non-profit
IDEO.org, will lead students through an immersive, hands-on class in order to demonstrate the
philosophy and practice of design thinking. Design thinking is something you can learn only by doing,
so we'll get out into the world and tackle a design challenge of our own together. We'll learn how to
research by researching, learn how to prototype by prototyping. At the end of the class you should feel
confident in your abilities to apply design thinking to any challenges you're facing - and to come up
with new ideas and solutions as a result.
Summer 2016 course meeting times: June 9, 10, 17, 9am-5pm; June 18, 10am-6pm; June 24,
9am-1pm.
784. The Nonprofit Sector: Concepts and Theories. (A) Guo.
Can you imagine a world without the vitality and diversity of the nonprofit sector? What would it be
like? Everything from health care to education, from serving the disadvantaged to protecting and
restoring the environment, nonprofit organizations seem to have become an inseparable part of every
aspect of our lives. So often they are taken for granted that we seldom pause and reflect on the roles
and functions of these vital organizations in our community. This course will introduce you to the
various roles that voluntary, philanthropic and nonprofit organizations play in American society. It will
cover the theory, size, scope and functions of the sector from multiple disciplinary perspectives
including historical, political, economic, and social views. The course also has a "hidden agenda." Take
this class to see and discover what this agenda is!
595. Nonprofit Storytelling. (L) Eyerly.
Prospective and ongoing volunteers, donors, and other supporters are motivated by a strong belief in a
nonprofit's mission, confidence in its reputation, and certainty that the organization is using resources
wisely and making a difference. Their belief, confidence and certainty are rooted not only in what
nonprofits do, but how they talk about it. In this class, students will learn why storytelling should be at
the center of nonprofit communications. What are good stories? How are they structured? Where do
you find them and how do you communicate them? Can a nonprofit build a culture of storytelling
among its leaders, staff, and the population it serves? Does telling stories really help nonprofits
advance their missions? We will use current and relevant case studies that help demonstrate the core
concepts of this course.

Page 28 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
SM 782. Small Group Processes. Taylor,McGrew,Kaminstein,Jean-Pierre. see website for course
dates/times:
http://www.sp2.upenn.edu/degree-programs/ms-in-nonprofit-leadership/academics/
ourse-schedule/
Studying the behavior of groups and the actions/inactions of people within groups provides a doorway
to deeper understanding of ourselves, our families, our friends, our colleagues, our organizations, and
our communitites. This .5 credit course is designed for Penn Graduate students eager to generate
constructive group processes when chairing a committee, managing a work group, teaching in a
classroom, conducting a support/therapy group or facilitating strategy formulation. It is easy to look
back and see what went right or wrong in a group or when observing what others are doing. But tuning
into and gaining a comprehensive grasp of these processes when they are happening and learning
how to take constructive actions in the here and now when it can have a meaningful impact, requires a
high level of cognitive capability combined with a special form of relational artistry. This weekend
course is an amalgam of experiential activities and energizing ways to internalize the rich concepts
developed during a hundred years of research. Participants are required to be fully present and fully
engaged for the whole weekend, read the equivalent of a book's worth of material, and write an 8page (double spaced) paper. Taught by senior groups instructors, including those who have worked in
the Small Group Process workshop in the Wharton Leadership Ventures.
783. Field Exercise in Social Impact Measurement. Hargro.
The twofold purpose of social impact measurement is to assess and improve the impact of nonprofit
programs, and to inform grantmaking practice and effectiveness. In addition to accounting for funds
spent and reporting on the actual work carried out, social impact measurement is an essential learning
opportunity for grantmaker and grantee. However, choosing an appropriate methodology of
measurement is critical. This course will offer an overview of leading social impact measurement
methodologies and tools, and an impact measurement field exercise. During the field exercise, student
teams will develop an evaluation plan and associated instruments for a local nonprofit using one or
more of the methodologies. Teams will present their evaluation plans and offer recommendations for
implementation. Lectures will be complemented by class time devoted to field exercise team meetings
and off-site field work.
785. Group Dynamics and Organizational Politics. (A) Smith.Prerequisite(s): Enrollment in NPLD
program or permission of the instructor.
This intensely experiential course, offered in the fall semester, is designed for those providing group
and institutional leadership at any level of a human enterprise, managing work groups, serving on
special task forces, chairing committees, teaching in classrooms, conducting support groups,
facilitating groups in clinical settings, etc. Students will focus on two topics: (1) an in-depth
understanding of group dynamics while they are in action, and (2) the organizational relationships
between groups with power, groups that experience themselves as powerless and those caught in the
middle. With group and inter-group relations it is easy to see what went right or wrong in hindsight, or
when observing from a distance, but tuning into these dynamics when caught up in them and taking
constructive actions when it can have a meaningful impact, requires complex cognitive and emotional
processing and use of multiple logics simultaneously. This educational format also explores the
mysteries of counter-intuitive principles, such as "to grow, cut back," and "to strengthen self, augment
other," are examined. The experiential events that are at the center of this learning occur over two full
weekends, one in October and one in November.

Page 29 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
787. Leadership for the New Economy. (A) Smith. Permission required; contact program office with
request - adamsaks@sp2.upenn.edu
This course is for individuals whose careers will call upon them to be visionary thinkers, sophisticated
system thinkers and enlightened strategic thinkers. It is for women and men who will take
transformative leadership actions that can be successfully implemented by people and groups at all
levels of organizations and social enterprises. Recent events have shown that established leadership
models need to be revitalized, given the complexities of the contemporary world. Hence this course
emphasizes the skills needed to engage in leadership acts relevant to the 21st century, competencies
centered on building green technologies, creating sustainable energy, preserving the sanctity of water,
fostering environmental-friendly policies, and constructing an economics predicated on principles of
abundance rather than scarcity. Case studies of Lincoln, Gandhi, and Mandela will highlight that many
of the key leadership lessons required for this era were elegantly crafted by these giants of history in
conditions of extreme adversity not unlike the challenges of today. Key topics are decision making
under conditions of uncertainty, building meaningful authority systems, using power creatively,
harnessing the latent potential contained within conflicts and partnering with competitors and
adversaries.
786. Strategic Management and Leadership of Nonprofits. (A) Guo.
This course is designed to introduce students to the fundamental issues in accountability and
governance and the administration and management in nonprofit organizations. Through research and
analysis, students will understand multiple structures of accountability and the various stakeholders in
nonprofits; understand the duties and dynamics of boards of directors in conjunction with other
mechanisms of governance (e.g. chief executive officers, advisory boards, etc.); develop an
understanding of management techniques and leadership skills for enhancing the effectiveness of
nonprofit organizations. Students will be asked to think about the challenges of runningnonprofit
organizations in a comparative context, with cases drawn from both the U.S. and abroad.
The emphasis of this course is on acquiring operational skills. The course is designed for those who
may have had years of experience managing other people and programs in the nonprofit sector but
who want to develop a more systematic mastery of this challenge, as well as students from other
sectors who aspire to a nonprofit leadership role.
790. (NPLD590) Social Finance. (A) Lamas. The course is open to students across the University. All
graduate students who take this course must register under NPLD 790. All undergraduate students
must register under NPLD 590.
Economic analysis and financial accounting are like languages: fluency comes with practice. In-class
review of case studies (including in-person discussions with the representatives of diverse agencies
and organizations featured in the case studies) will enable students to test and develop their capacity
for applying conceptual tools and analytical methods to sometimes messy and always complicated,
real-life situations.
The course objective is to develop theoretical understanding, critical judgment, and practical skills
for sensitive and effective engagement with financial and economic matters of significance. Students
will learn: (a) different ways of thinking about the economic foundations of social policy, (b) the basic
terminology, tools, and methods for analyzing the financial statements of a wide range of
organizations, and (c) accounting procedures for evaluating business, government, and organizational
operations, policies, and practices.
This course is at once macro and micro in its orientation: It provides a conceptual basis - derived
from mainstream and alternative perspectives - for thinking about the economic dimensions of human
development and social policy, and it introduces a set of core competencies for leadership and
financial management of organizations, including conventional enterprises, consulting firms, research
institutions, governmental agencies, philanthropies, cooperatives, and other third-sector organizations.

Page 30 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
791. Leadership: Designing the Future. (A) Smith.
This experiential, highly interactive seminar is for those eager to serve in managerial/leadership
positions of human systems that create/maintain the organizational and fiscal viability of public, nonprofit or private enterprises, including their partnerships. Candidates in all Penn graduate programs are
welcome, whether one's ambition is to generate sustainable livelihoods, renewable energy, wealth,
clean water, viable environments, robotics, or quality services in fields such as education, health care,
AI, or criminal justice. Course Participants are members of decision-making groups that run a
computer-based, data-driven, future-creating, socio-econominc simulation while synchronously
studying the intra and inter-group dynamics inherent in all leadership actions.
Fall 2016 class meetings will be Wednesdays 10/26 and 11/2 from 5:30-8:30pm; Friday 11/4 at 6pm
through Sunday 11/6 to 6pm; Friday 11/11 at 6pm through Sunday 11/13 to 6pm; Wednesday 11/16
from 5:30-8:30pm.
SM 797. (URBS404) Philanthropy and the City. (B) Bauer/Goldman.
This course will focus on how urban communities are shaped by the nonprofit sector and the billions of
philanthropic dollars that fuel their work. By bridging theory and practice, the class explores what
dynamics are at play to deliver vital services or programs in healthcare, education, the arts, community
development, and other issues. The course will also focus on these important questions: (1) Whose
responsibility is the public good? How is that responsibility shared by the public, private, and nonprofit
sectors? and (2) Given that responsibility for the public good, which individuals and groups make the
decisions about how to serve the public good? How are these decisions made, and who benefits from
these decisions? Students will consider these questions in an interdisciplinary context that will bring a
historical and philosophical perspective to the examination of the values and institutions that
characterize the contemporary philanthropy and the nonprofit sector.

Page 31 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
SM 792. Social Entrepreneurship. (B) Frumkin.
Social entrepreneurs are individuals with innovative vision seeking to accomplish important public
purposes through the creative and aggressive mobilization of people and resources. Using academic
theory and research on social entrepreneurship as a framework, student innovators learn to design,
develop, and lead social change organizations of their own invention. Students turn their passion for
changing the world into concrete plans for launching a venture. Over the course of the semester, we
will cover a broad array of topics associated with social innovation and entrepreneurship, including
defining the problem/opportunity, refining the mission/vision, developing market research and industry
analysis, defining a financial and operating structure, assessing results and progress, and scaling an
enterprise. This course is neutral on sector. Graduate students in any of Penn's graduate and
professional schools who want to create social value through either nonprofit or for-profit ventures are
invited to take the class and develop their ideas. The class will expose students to the process of
getting an organization - regardless of sector - off the ground and running.
While this is a class on innovation and entrepreneurship, students do not need to be committed to
starting a venture upon graduation. The skills and tools contained in the course have wide applicability
in the workplace. Being able to develop a coherent venture plan is great training for anyone who wants
to work in government, philanthropy, or the business sector funding or managing existing
organizations. The course attempts to convey a picture of what a well-considered and well-executed
venture plan looks like with the goal of developing in students an appreciation for clear thinking in the
pursuit of the creation of public value.
Students will work throughout the term on a plan for an organization that they devise, with
assignments spread out throughout the term. Elements of a venture plan will be drafted through
multiple class assignments, and students present formally and informally several times throughout the
semester, receiving feedback from faculty, peers, social entrepreneurs, and invited guests. At the end
of the term, students will assemble all the pieces they have worked on in the class, revise and hone
these elements, and then put them into a coherent venture plan for their organization. This class is
ideal preparation for the Dell Social Innovation Challenge (www.dellchallenge.org), which the instructor
founded and which awards funds to launch new student social ventures. Entry into the Challenge is not
required.
SM 793. Leadership Within & Across Boundaries. (B) Klein.
This spring semester course explores the key elements of individual leadership, team leadership, and
cross sector leadership in a highly participative format. Through a series of individual assignments,
class discussions, exercises, and simulations, students will explore and understand the potential for
acts of leadership at every level (and in every organization) to create wealth and acheive positive
social change. The course is taught by the Executive Director of the Wharton Graduate Leadership
Program and is open to graduate students throughout the university as well as Penn undergraduate
seniors.
In order to create, invoke, and evoke acts of leadership, we must understand ourselves, our teams
and organizations, and our environments. From this integrated understanding, a set of possibilities
emerge that shape the actions necessary to create positive social change. How can we leverage the
abundance of resources available to individuals, teams, organizations, and collective networks? This
course will explore leadership in five modules: individual leadership, team leadership, organizational
leadership, leadership across boundaries, and network leadership. This seminar style survey course
will blend didactic, dialogic, and experiential methods to build an integrated framework for analysis that
identifies and amplifies the opportunities or acts of leadership.

Page 32 of 33

SOCIAL WORK
(SW) {SWRK}
796. Philanthropy and Fundraising Tools for Managers. (B) Heisman. Undergraduates need
permission
This course will review the everyday tools that nonprofit managers and development officers need to
raise funds from individuals and other sources of private philanthropy. Last year, Americans gave
approximately $300 million and 83% of it was from individuals. The fundraising profession has created
a body of knowledge in the past twenty years that can guide effective fundraising programs so that
charitable organizations can support their mission. The sessions will review the theory and practical
techniques that development professionals use every day in large and small organizations including
annual giving, major gifts, planned giving, cultivation of donors, making your case for support, the
Seven Faces of Philanthropy, special events, and prospect research. There will also be discussions of
philanthropic trends and current giving patterns. For those who are interested in nonprofit
administration, these will be critical tools to understand.

Page 33 of 33

