TURKISH
(AS) {TURK}

499. INDEPENDENT STUDY.

GENERAL
021. (TURK621) Elementary Turkish I. (A) Hatiboglu.
This is a course for beginners who have no previous knowledge of Turkish. Using a communicative
approach, Elementary Turkish introduces basic vocabulary and grammar rules and focuses on
building language competencies in listening, reading, speaking and writing. By the end of the course,
students will be able to participate in simple conversations, to know daily expressions, and will
understand simple dialogues in day-to-day context and will be able to count and tell time. Will be able
to speak about events that happened in the past and express plans for the future. Students will also
develop writing strategies that will allow them to write simple letters and fill in commonly-used forms.
022. (TURK622) Elementary Turkish II. (B) Hatiboglu.Prerequisite(s): TURK 021, Elementary Turkish
I, or equivalent.
This course is a continuation of TURK 021 and is designed to strengthen and extend students'
listening, speaking, reading and writing competence and to deepen an understanding of Turkish
people in Turkey. By the end of this course, students will be able to handle a variety of day to day
needs in Turkish-speaking settings and engage in simple conversations. Students can expect to be
able to order food and drinks, purchase things, and to be able to be familiar with current social topics.
Students will be able to talk about all tenses, present, future, past, past continuous, make
comparisons, describe people and things in detail, make travel plans, make reservations in hotels and
holiday resorts, write complaint letters. By the end of the course, students will be able to talk about
their studies and their plans for the future. Also, students will develop reading strategies that should
allow them to understand the general meaning of articles, and short literary texts. Students will learn
practical life in Turkey and will explore Turkish culture on the internet.
023. (TURK623) Intermediate Turkish I. (A) Hatiboglu.Prerequisite(s): TURK 022 or equivalent.
A continuation of elementary Turkish, with emphasis on grammar and reading. This course is for
students who have previous knowledge of Turkish or students who have completed Elementary
Turkish I and II. This course is designed to improve students' writing and speaking competence, to
increase vocabulary, to deepen grammar usage and to help develop effective reading and listening
strategies in Turkish, and in order give them cultural knowledge, students are exposed to authentic
materials.
024. (TURK624) Intermediate Turkish II. (B) Hatiboglu.
Expands students writing and speaking competence in Turkish, increases vocabulary, and helps
students' practice effective reading and listening strategies. Our in-class discussions are based on
role-plays and weekly readings and news reports from TV and newspapers. We create discussion
groups and let them communicate through, threaded discussions, chat rooms and skype. The review
of grammar will not be the primary focus of the course. Students will, expand and deepen their
knowledge of grammar through specific grammar exercises. They will have opportunity to practice and
read about the cultural and historical issues and get prepared for an advanced level Turkish.

Page 1 of 4

TURKISH
(AS) {TURK}
025. (TURK625) Advanced Modern Turkish I. (A) Hatiboglu.Prerequisite(s): TURK 024, Intermediate
Turkish II.
The study of modern Turkish at the advanced level; emphasis on grammar and reading, focusing on
Business Turkish. Interviews with professionals from different business groups will take place, such
as, education, medicine, business law and political science.
026. (TURK626) Advanced Modern Turkish II. (B) Hatiboglu.Prerequisite(s): TURK 025, Advanced
Modern Turkish I, or equivalent.
This course is designed to improve students writing and speaking levels through role plays, case
studies, essays, interviews, reading articles from newspapers, analyzing books of contemporary
Turkish authors such as Orhan Pamuk, Elif Safak, Ayse Kulin, Yasar Kemal and introduce students to
Turkish poets such as Nazim Hikmet, Orhan Veli, Ozdemir Asaf, Murathan Mungan, Can Yucel. During
each lesson, students will be asked to interview each other on given news articles about different
subjects including economy, politics, sports, art, music and daily news. These conversations will take
place on student's level of Turkish knowledge.
027. (TURK627) Advanced Spoken Turkish and Cinema I. (A) Hatiboglu.
028. (TURK628) Advanced Spoken Turkish and Cinema II. (B)
SM 121. (TURK521) Advanced Turkish Culture & Media I. (A) Hatiboglu.
This course is for students who are from all different levels of Turkish knowledge. They are expected
to write and talk about Turkish movies, culture, politics according to their own level and pace. They will
talk to Turkish visitors and interview them. Turkish movies will be the part of the course and once a
month, students will watch a Turkish movie and analyze it. Discussions will take place and students
will write essays about the movie. This course is designed with a technology-rich, project based
approach. The materials will go beyond instruction in grammar and vocabulary to support the
acquisition of socio-cultural pragmatics, and intercultural learning.
SM 122. (TURK522) Advanced Turkish Culture & Media II. (B) Hatiboglu.
Similar to TURK 212, Advanced Turkish Culture & Media I, in this course students also will have
exposure to social Turkish clubs and to establish their own. They will arrange their Turkish tea parties
and learn about Turkish cuisine. Expose Turkish daily news and interview Turkish business people in
Turkish. Team spirit or ethics with those of the United States. Students will present and prepare a
drama. Mainly students will create and decide their activities and discussions and the instructor will
just monitor them most of time. They will continue watching Turkish movies and expose to Turkish
culture through these films. After each movie discussions and essay writings will be expected.
SM 229. (TURK629) Ottoman Turkish I. (M) Hatiboglu.Prerequisite(s): One semester Arabic or
Persian equivalent.
This course is an introduction to Ottoman Turkish with basic characteristics. Ottoman Turkish through
readings in printed selections will be exercised with different techniques. Students will learn Persian
and Arabic effects on Ottoman Turkish. They will be able to read simple texts at the end of this course.
General information on Ottoman Turkish will be given to students during this course. This course will
be offered one semester during the school year.
Not open to auditors
SM 329. (TURK729) ADV RDGS OTTOMAN TEXTS. (M)

Page 2 of 4

TURKISH
(AS) {TURK}
SM 521. (TURK121) Advanced Turkish Culture & Media I. (A) Hatiboglu.
This course is TURK 121 for graduate students.
SM 522. (TURK122) Advanced Turkish Culture & Media II. (B) Hatiboglu.
This course is TURK 122 for graduate students.
621. (TURK021) Elementary Turkish I. (A) Hatiboglu.
This course is TURK-021 for graduate students. Introduction to the spoken and written language of
contemporary Turkey.
622. (TURK022) Elementary Turkish II. (B) Hatiboglu.Prerequisite(s): TURK 621, Elementary Turkish
II or equivalent.
This course is TURK 022 for graduate students.
623. (TURK023) Intermediate Turkish I. (A) Hatiboglu.Prerequisite(s): TURK 622, Elementary
Turkish II, or equivalent.
A continuation of TURK 622, with emphasis on grammar and reading. This course is TURK 022 for
graduate students.
624. (TURK024) Intermediate Turkish II. (B) Hatiboglu.Prerequisite(s): TURK 623, Intermediate
Turkish I or equivalent.
This course is TURK 024 for graduate students.
625. (TURK025) Advanced Modern Turkish I. (A) Hatiboglu.Prerequisite(s): TURK 024, Intermediate
Turkish II or equivalent.
The study of modern Turkish at the advanced level; emphasis on grammar and reading, focusing on
business Turkish. Interviews with professionals from different business groups will take place, such as,
education, medicine, business, law, and political science. This course is TURK 025 for graduate
students.
626. (TURK026) Advanced Modern Turkish II. (B) Hatiboglu.Prerequisite(s): TURK 625, Advanced
Modern Turkish I, or equivalent.
This course is TURK 026, Advanced Modern Turkish II for graduate students.
627. (TURK027) ADV SPOKEN TURK/CINEMA. (A)
628. (TURK028) ADV SPKN TURK/CINEMA II. (B)
SM 729. (TURK329) ADV RDGS OTTOMAN TEXTS.

Page 3 of 4

TURKISH
(AS) {TURK}
SM 629. (TURK229) Ottoman Turkish I. (M) Hatiboglu.Prerequisite(s): One semester Arabic or
Persian equivalent.
This course is an introduction to Ottoman Turkish with basic characteristics. Ottoman Turkish through
readings in printed selections will be exercised with different techniques. Students will learn Persian
and Arabic effects on Ottoman Turkish. They will be able to read simple texts at the end of this course.
General information on Ottoman Turkish will be given to students during this course. This course will
be offered one semester during the school year.

Page 4 of 4

