URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
SM 010. (AFRC041, SOCI041) Homelessness & Urban Inequality. (A) Culhane.
This freshman seminar examines the homelessness problem from a variety of scientific and policy
perspectives. Contemporary homelessness differs significantly from related conditions of destitute
poverty during other eras of our nation's history. Advocates, researchers and policymakers have all
played key roles in defining the current problem, measuring its prevalence, and designing interventions
to reduce it. The first section of this course examines the definitional and measurement issues, and
how they affect our understanding of the scale and composition of the problem. Explanations for
homelessness have also been varied, and the second part of the course focuses on examining the
merits of some of those explanations, and in particular, the role of the affordable housing crisis. The
third section of the course focuses on the dynamics of homelessness, combining evidence from
ethnographic studies of how people become homeless and experience homelessness, with
quantitative research on the patterns of entry and exit from the condition. The final section of the
course turns to the approaches taken by policymakers and advocates to address the problem, and
considers the efficacy and quandaries associated with various policy strategies. The course concludes
by contemplating the future of homelessness research and public policy.
SM 011. Crime and Punishment. (M) Schneider. Previously URBS 110
How have definitions of crime and forms of punishment changed over time? What have been the uses
and legacy of extra-legal violence? How have the forms of crime and punishment reflected the
structure of American society? Using both historical and contemporary texts, this freshman seminar
will explore these and other questions and in the process analyze the development of juvenile justice,
the organization of corrections, the application of the death penalty, and the rise of the drug economy.
SM 016. (MUSC016) Intro to Sound Studies. (M) Waltham-Smith.
Sound is all around us and shapes almost every aspect of our everyday lives, and yet, in comparison
to our rich descriptions of visual culture, we often lack the explanatory power to analyze and assess
the overwhelming influence of the sonic. This introduction to sound studies course will provide both a
rigorous conceptual and also a creative, hands-on understanding of the phenomena at the center of
Penn's Year of Sound. We will explore how sound and auditory cultures have been theorized, how
soundscapes shape and transform built environments and the social relations they underpin or
express, how technologies have affected our relationships to sound, and how we might go about
investigating aural phenomena.
The course will focus on sound in urban spaces. Structured around a number of themes that cut
across disciplinary, historical and geographical boundaries, the course will create a transatlantic
dialogue between investigative fieldwork into Philadelphia?s soundscape and the changing auditory
profile of Paris from the clatter of medieval sword fights through the cultivation of modern urban
experience in Haussmann's boulevards to the contemporary soundscape. Other topics will include the
role of sound-reproduction and mobile technologies, and the consumption and regulation of sound. We
will encounter a wide variety of materials from literary texts to mobile apps and video games, not to
mention a vast range of sounds, and we will tackle the topic from multiple interdisciplinary angles from
Continental philosophy to urban anthropology to ask how sound composes urban space, transforming
social bonds and power relations. Alongside written work, you will make field recordings on the streets
of Philadelphia and develop creative projects using media of your choice to reflect upon urban sound.
SM 018. (MUSC018) Freshman seminar.. (A) Staff..
The primary goal of the freshman seminar program is to provide every freshman the opportunity for a
direct personal encounter with a faculty member in a small sitting devoted to a significant intellectual
endeavor. Specific topics be posted at the beginning of each academic year. Please see the College
Freshman seminar website for information on course offerings: http://www.college.upenn.edu/
requirements-courses.

Page 1 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
SM 050. (GSWS040) Womanism and Identity Politics in the Realm of Hip-Hop. Patterson.
This course centers on the intersections of womanism, woman of color identity development, and
agency within hip-hop culture. We will touch on several topics that uncover the condition of minoritized
women in hip-hop media, including creating/owning space, lyrical assault, defining womanhood,
sexuality, and fetishes. In exploring music, literature, advertisements, film, and television, we will
discuss the ways women of color construct understandings of self, while navigating and reimagining
reality within hip-hop contexts.
SM 103. (HIST209) Industrial Metropolis. (A) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Vitiello. Course
is available to freshmen and sophomores
Although we no longer think of most U.S. cities as industrial cities, metropolitan areas today are all
products of industrial economies, technologies, and social systems. This course explores the
industrialization and deindustrialization of American cities within their evolving global context from the
era of European colonization to the present. It includes weekly readings and discussion, regular
response papers and walking tours, in- class exercises, and a research paper using primary sources.
Themes include energy and ecology, labor and production, inner city and suburban development,
globalization, and economic restructuring. Ultimately, the class aims to give students a broad
knowledge of 1) the history of industrial capitalism, 2) its effects on cities and regions over the past
three centuries, and 3) analytical tools for understanding the past, present, and future of metropolitan
economies, geography, and society.
104. (HIST153) Transformation of Urban America. (B) Society Sector. All classes. Gillette.
The course traces the economic, social, and political history of American cities after World War II. It
focuses on how the economic problems of the industrial city were compounded by the racial conflicts
of the 1950s and 1960s and the fiscal crises of the 1970s. The last part of the course examines the
forces that have led to the revitalization of cities in recent years.
SM 106. (ARTH100, ENGL016) Freshman Seminar. Staff. For Freshmen Only
Topic varies.
Fall 2016: A city is more than just a collection of places. It is a living archive of stories, memories
and histories. Whose stories do we hear? Whose stories should we preserve? Are all stories equal? In
this course, students will be introduced to a variety of unique historical sites and civic institutions that
make visible anew Philadelphia and its cultural history. From the first classroom of the university, which
was located at the American Philosophical Society, to the Johnson House Underground Railroad
Station and House Museum on Germantown Avenue, this course will highlight the social life of the city,
approaching the city itself as a living museum. What can the artworks, objects and institutions we
experience each week teach us about the society in which we live? To answer this question, we will
meet with artists, archivists, curators and scholars who will illuminate for us the social life of their
collections. Through this course, students will be introduced to the study of the history of art. Our
discussions will focus on changing aesthetics, the cultural politics of collecting, aspects of display and
contextualization, the institution of the museum, and the increasingly blurred boundaries between
ethnography, anthropology, and art history.
SM 112. (AFRC011, SOCI011) Urban Sociology. (M) Flippen.
This course is a comprehensive introduction to the sociological study of urban areas. This includes
more general topics as the rise of cities and theories urbanism, as well as more specific areas of
inquiry, including American urbanism, segregation, urban poverty, suburbanization and sprawl,
neighborhoods and crime, and immigrant ghettos. The course will also devote significant attention to
globalization and the process of urbanization in less developed counties.

Page 2 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
114. (AFRC112, GSWS114, SOCI112) Discrimination: Sexual and Racial Conflict. (M) Society
Sector. All classes. Madden.
This course is concerned with the structure, the causes and correlates, and the government policies to
alleviate discrimination by race and gender in the United States. The central focus of the course is on
employment differences by race and gender and the extent to which they arise from labor market
discrimination versus other causes, although racial discrimination in housing is also considered. After
a comprehensive overview of the structures of labor and housing markets and of nondiscriminatory
reasons (that is, the cumulative effects of past discrimination and/or experiences) for the existence of
group differentials in employment, wages, and residential locations, various theories of the sources of
current discrimination are reviewed and evaluated. Actual governmental policies and alternative
policies are evaluated in light of both the empirical evidence on group differences and the alternative
theories of discrimination.
121. (NELC103) Origin and Culture of Cities. (A) History & Tradition Sector. All classes. Zettler.
Previously URBS 101
The UN estimates that 2.9 of the world's 6.1 billion people live in cities and that this percentage is
rapidly increasing in many parts of the world. This course examines urban life and urban problems by
providing anthropological perspectives on this distinctive form of human association and land use. First
we will examine the "origin" of cities, focusing on several of the places where cities first developed,
including Mesopotamia and the Valley of Mexico. We will then investigate the internal structure of nonindustrial cities by looking at case studies from around the world and from connections between the
cities of the past and the city in which we live and work today.
L/R 160. (AFRC006, ASAM006, SOCI006) Race and Ethnic Relations. (C) Charles, Kao, Zuberi.
Previously URBS 214
The course will focus on race and ethnicity in the United States. We begin with a brief history of racial
categorization and immigration to the U.S. The course continues by examining a number of topics
including racial and ethnic identity, interracial and interethnic friendships and marriage, racial attitudes,
mass media images, residential segregation, educational stratification, and labor market outcomes.
The course will include discussions of African Americans, Whites, Hispanics, Asian Americans and
multiracials.
L/R 122. (ANTH107, SAST002) The City in South Asia. (C) Society Sector. All classes. Mitchell.
This interdisciplinary social science course examines key topics, themes, and analytic methods in the
study of South Asia by focusing on significant South Asian cities. With one-fifth of the worlds
population, South Asia and its urban centers are playing an increasingly important role in recent global
economic transformations, resulting in fundamental changes within both the subcontinent and the
larger world. Drawing primarily on ethnographic studies of South Asia in the context of rapid historical
change, the course also incorporates research drawn from urban studies, architecture, political
science, and history, as well as fiction and film.
Topics include globalization and new economic dynamics in South Asia; the formation of a new
urban middle class; consumption and consumer culture; urban political formations, democratic
institutions, and practices; criminality & the underworld; population growth, changes in the built
environment, and demographic shifts; everyday life in South Asia and ethnic, and ethnic, cultural, and
linguistic identities, differences, and violence in South Asia's urban environments. This is an
introductory level course appropriate for students with no background in South Asia or for those
seeking to better understand South Asia's urban environments in the context of recent globalization
and rapid historical changes. No prerequisites. Fulfills College sector requirement in Society and
foundational approach in Cross-Cultural Analysis.

Page 3 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
136. (AFRC136, PSCI136) Urban Politics in the United States. (B) Society Sector. All classes.
Reed.
This course focuses on political responses to urbanization in the United States. Topics include local
government, national urban politics, and the changing nature of cities.
139. (ANTH139, NELC182) Ancient Civilizations of the World. (M) History & Tradition Sector. All
classes. Zettler.
The archaeology of the complex societies of the Old and New Worlds from the end of the paleolithic
up to and including the earliest civilizations.
SM 167. (AFRC167, AFST167, HIST167) THE NEW AFRICAN DIASPORA: AFRICAN IMMIGRANT
LIVES IN WEST PHILADELPHIA. (M) CASSANELLI.
This seminar will examine the experiences of recent African immigrants and refugees in Philadelphia
in an historical framework. We will employ a variety of sources-newspapers, census data, legal briefs,
literature and film, and diaspora internet sites-to explore the lives, aspirations, and perceptions of
Philadelphia's African residents. There will be opportunities for dialogue with high school students,
teachers, and parents; with representatives of African community and business organizations; and with
local government and service agencies. Students will be required to do a final project which involves
volunteering with an African immigrant non-profit or business and/or conducting focused research on
specific African communities in Philadelphia.
SM 178. (AFRC078, HIST173) Faculty-Student Collaborative Action Seminar in Urban
University-Community Relations. (C) Harkavy. previously URBS 078; Benjamin Franklin Seminar
One of the goals of this seminar is to help students develop their capacity to solve strategic, real-world
problems by working collaboratively in the classroom, on campus, and in the West Philadelphia
community. Research teams help contribute to the improvement of education on campus and in the
community, as well as the improvement of university-community relations.
Among other responsibilities, students focus their community service on college and career
readiness at West Philadelphia High School and Sayre High School. Students are typically engaged in
academically based community service learning at the schools for two hours each week.
A primary goal of the seminar is to help students develop proposals as to how a Penn
undergraduate education might better empower students to produce, not simply "consume," societallyuseful knowledge, as well as function as caring, contributing citizens of a democratic society. Please
note new location of the class: The Netter Conference Room is on 111 South 38th Street, on the 2nd
floor.
SM 198. CITIES CITIZENS & UTOPIA. (C)
SM 200. Urban Research Methods. (C) Stern, Mark or Goldstein, Ira. Fulfills Quantitative Data
Analysis Requirement
This course will examine different ways of undertaking urban research. The goal will be to link
substantive research questions to appropriate data and research methods. Computer-based
quantitative methods, demographic techniques, mapping / GIS and qualitative approaches will be
covered in this course. There will be a set of assignments including one in which students have an
opportunity to undertake their own field research in a Philadelphia neighborhood involving multiple
methods of scientific inquiry. All instructional materials will be based on data related to contemporary
public policy issues.

Page 4 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
SM 202. (EDUC202) Urban Education. (C) Paul Skilton-Sylvester.
This seminar focuses on two main questions: 1) How have US schools and urban ones in particular
continued to reproduce inequalities rather than ameliorating them? 2) In the informational age, how do
the systems affecting education need to change to create more successful and equitable outcomes?
The course is designed to bridge the divide between theory and practice. Each class session looks at
issues of equity in relation to an area of practice (e.g. lesson design, curriculum planning, fostering
positive student identities, classroom management, school funding, policy planning...), while bringing
theoretical frames to bear from the fields of education, sociology, anthropology and psychology.
Among the theoretical frames students will learn will be the tools of systems thinking (Bertalanffy,
1968). While most of us have internalized the key lesson of the industrial revolution-that to understand
something we must break it into its parts; systems thinking, in contrast, is about understanding the
parts in relation to whole. The power of systems thinking is that each point of connection also serves
as a point of intervention. By showing the importance of decisions of those within classrooms and
those outside of them, this course is well-suited to students of education, but also any who seek a role
in creating a more just society.
SM 203. Introduction to City Planning: Planning Urban Spaces. (L) Gorostiza.
This course will provide a general introduction to the concepts and practice of city planning. Topics to
be discussed include: the process and nature of planning - theories, methods and roles as manifested
in practice; history and trends in city planning; functional planning practice; planning within
constraints--a field project; planning in the international arena; present crisis in planning.
204. Urban Law. (A) Keene.
This course will focus on selected aspects of urban law that are particularly relevant to areas of high
population density. After an introduction to the American judicial system, it will examine the legal
issues that arise in the management of land development and use, with special attention to
constitutional questions involving equal protection, due process, and the "takings" clause, and routine
run-of-the-mill zoning challenges. This course meets the Cultural Diversity requirement.
SM 205. People and Design. (B) Berman.
The built environment of a city is more than a mere backdrop; the design can actually affect people's
experiences. Environmental design primarily focuses on the relationship between people and the built
environment. It also looks at how the built environment interacts with the natural one (and the potential
for greater sustainability). This course will allow students to gain a deeper understanding of how
people create, perceive, and use the designed environment. We'll approach these concepts by
analyzing design at a variety of scales, from products to interior design to architecture. Finally, using
that knowledge, we'll conclude by analyzing urban spaces of the city.
SM 206. (URBS506) Public Environment of Cities: An Introduction to the Urban Landscape. (B)
Nairn.
This course will explore the role of public spaces - streets, boulevards, parks and squares - in cities
and their social uses. With the University of Pennsylvania campus and the City of Philadelphia serving
as our laboratory, we will critically examine the evolution of the movement of corridors, open space
and buildings of the urban landscape and their changing uses. Case studies of social spaces on
campus and public open spaces in Center City will help inform our understanding of how public
environment serves, well or poorly, the varying needs of diverse users. While graphic skills are not
required, graphic means as well as writing will be employed to communicate critical thought, ideas,
and conclusions.

Page 5 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
SM 207. (ASAM205) Asian American Communities. (C) Khan.
Who is Asian American and how and where do we recognize Asian America? This interdisciplinary
course explores the multiple factors that define Asian American identity and community. In order to
provide a sketch of the multifacted experience of this growing minority group, we will discuss a wide
variety of texts from scholarly, artistic, and popular (film, cinematic) sources that mark key moments in
the cultural history of Asia America. The course will address major themes of community life including
migration history, Asian American as model minority, race, class, and transnational scope of Asian
America. In combination with the readings, this class will foster and promote independent research
based on site visits to various Asian American communities in Philadelphia and will host community
leaders as guest lecturers.
SM 210. (HIST210) The City. (B) Humanities & Social Science Sector. Class of 2010 & beyond.
Schneider, Nairn. Also fulfills General Requirement in Society for Class of 2009 and prior
Urbs/Hist 210 will focus on Baltimore and use The Wire as one of its core texts. The course will explore
the history and development of the city and its institutions, with a thematic focus on issues such as
industrialization and deindustrialization; urban renewal and the role of universities; public education
and youth; policing and the criminal justice system; drugs and underground markets; public housing
and suburbanization; and Baltimore's so- called renaissance amidst persistent poverty. The seminar
will include field trips both in Philadelphia and a concluding all-day trip to Baltimore.
SM 218. (AFRC217) Introduction to African American Politics. Harris.
This course provides an introduction to the political experience of African Americans. While the course
will explore historical themes, it will be contemporary in its temporal focus. Topics will include African
American political thought, leadership and political economy, voting and participation, urban politics,
race and electoral politics. Additional topics will also include crime, the judiciary, and punishment; and
issues of gender, class, age, and sexual identity at the intersections of black politics.
212. (COML110, HIST246, THAR110) Theatre, History, Culture I: Classical Athens to Elizabethan
London. (M) Arts & Letters Sector. All Classes. Schlatter.
This course will explore the forms of public performance - most specifically theatre - as they emerge
from and give dramatic shape to the dynamic life of communal, civic and social bodies, from their
anthropological origins in ritual and religious ceremonies, to the rise of great urban centers, to the
closing of the theaters in London in 1642. This course will focus on the development of theatre practice
in both Western and non-Western cultures intersects with the history of cities, the rise of market
economies, and the emerging forces of national identity. In addition to examining the history of
performance practices, theatre architecture, scenic conventions, and acting methods, this course will
investigate, where appropriate, social and political history, the arts, civic ceremonies and the
dramaturgic structures of urban living.

Page 6 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
SM 213. (FOLK513, URBS513) Urban Ethnography. (M) Saverino.
Using Philadelphia as the site of students' praxis, this course explores the symbolic meanings and
social production of urban life and culture in the nation's fifth largest city. This course is structured as a
seminar with ethnographic background readings from Philadelphia and other urban settings to
introduce students to the study of the city as a site of everyday practice, as well as training in
conducting an ethnographic fieldwork project. The urban landscape provides an intensification of
macro processes such as globalization. Such processes and how humans experience them are more
easily studied and understood in an urban setting.
The class will explore social relational and cultural themes such as the ethnic city, the gendered city,
the contested city, the sacred city, the global city, and the aesthetic and expressive city. A diverse
range of reading assignments, images, and videos will augment our understandings of urban life.
Students will design and execute their own ethnographic fieldwork projects on an urban topic that
interests them. Through step-by-step instruction throughout the semester, students will learn
qualitative research techniques such as field notes, participant-observation, interviewing, and how to
interpret their own data, so that they will be able to complete their semester project.
SM 216. Social Entrepreneurship. (M) Mandujano.
Amidst perceptions that public sector and philanthropic support for local communities is increasingly
scarce, many community development practitioners are turning to social enterprise as a means to
improve social and economic conditions in their neighborhoods. This course will examine and evaluate
a number of recognized social enterprises tackling housing, workforce development, and job creation
challenges, including several planned field visits. Building on their understanding of these fields,
students will then divide into groups and develop business plans for their own social enterprises.
SM 219. The Heart of Social Change. (M) Charles Howard.
The Heart of Social Change: Experiments in Urban Development, Activism, and Social
Entrepreneurship will seek to challenge those who desire to work for social change to consider how
they may not only employ their heads and their hands, but also their hearts as they work to improve
the aspects of contemporary society that mean the most to them. This seminar-based class will
examine past and contemporary examples of heart-based activism, urban development and social
entrepreneurship yet it will also be a space where students will be asked to experiment with ways that
they too may be change agents.

Page 7 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
SM 220. (HIST214) The Immigration Debate: Advanced Benjamin Franklin Seminar. (M) Katz.
In the years since the 1965 repeal of nationality based quotas, immigration to the United States has
surged. Not only has the number of immigrants reached record highs, they have come from different
places. During the last great wave of immigration in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries,
immigrants came largely from southern and eastern Europe. Today, they come primarily from Latin
America and Asia. Formerly, they usually settled in cities, moving outward as their prosperity
increased; today, many bypass cities, heading straight for suburbs where a majority of immigrants now
live. They are reviving moribund city economies and providing essential labor for service industries,
construction, landscaping, and some manufacturing as well as well as for some professions and high
tech jobs. Yet, new immigration has resulted in massive expenditures on border control, huge
increases in deportation, and a fierce national political debate about the impact of immigration and
immigration reform. Debates about immigration frequently rest, either implicitly or explicitly on
assumptions about the history of immigration and immigration policy. These assumptions frequently
are incorrect - with major implications for public understanding and public
policy. There are few public issues in which history matters as much as it does for immigration. This
seminar will provide the historical background essential for framing discussions of immigration today. It
will consider the origins, demography, and geography of immigration and will pay special attention to
the history of immigration policy. Requirements include reading approximately one book per week,
writing several short commentary papers on readings, and leading workshops on the primary sources
for the study of immigr ation history.
221. CIVIC SCHOLARS PROSEM.
236. (ANTH236, NELC241) Iraq: Ancient Cities and Empires. (M) Al Kuntar.
This course surveys the cultural traditions of ancient Mesopotamia, the land between the Tigris and
Euphrates Rivers, a region commonly dubbed "cradle of civilization" or "heartland of cities," from an
archaeological perspective. It will investigate the emergence of sedentism and agriculture; early
villages and increasingly complex Neolithic and Chalcolithic cultures; the evolution of urban, literate
societies in the late 4th millennium; the city-states and incipient supra-regional polities of the third and
second millennium; the gradual emergence of the Assyrian and Babylonian "world empires," wellknown from historical books of the Bible, in the first millennium; and the cultural mix of Mesopotamia
under the successive domination of Greeks, Persians and Arabs. The course seeks to foster an
appreciation of the rich cultural heritage of ancient Mesopotamia, an understanding of cultural
continuities in the Middle East and a sense of the ancient Near Eastern underpinnings of western
civilization. No Prerequisite.
L/R 225. (ARCH255, ENVS255) Sustainability in Action. (M) Hughes/Billhymer.
The term Sustainability loosely organizes a diverse mix of issues relating to the science, politics, and
business of how humans can endure on Earth. Sustainability is about carrying capacity: making
resource decisions without compromising the ability of future generations to make their own resource
decisions. Sustainability thus requires an understanding of the systems whose carrying capacities
matter for human endurance; three prominent and interconnected systems are the environment, the
economy, and society. Sustainability also requires an understanding of the decision-making that
operates on these resource systems and affects their carrying capacities. In sum, the study of
Sustainability requires an introduction to environmental science, energy production, human
settlements, economic development, social justice, policy development, and international relations.
This course will provide that introduction though a weekly lecture series drawing on scholars from
across the university and a small group project that addresses a real problem confronting an institution
in Philadelphia. SEE POSTED SYLLABUS FOR INFORMATION ABOUT RECITATION SECTIONS.
231. (SOCI230) SPECIAL TOPIC SOCI.

Page 8 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
SM 233. (ARTH369, HIST233) World History: East Asia or Latin America. Staff.
Topics Vary
L/R 237. (GRMN237) Berlin: History, Politics, Culture. (M) Humanities & Social Science Sector.
Class of 2010 & beyond. Weissberg. All readings and lectures in English
What do you know about Berlin's history, architecture, culture, and political life? The present course
will offer a survey of the history of Prussia, beginning with the seventeenth century, and the unification
of the small towns of Berlin and koelln to establish a new capital for this country. It will tell the story of
Berlin's rising political prominence in the eighteenth century, its transformation into an industrial city in
the late nineteenth century, its rise to metropolis in the early twentieth century, its history during the
Third Reich, and the post-war cold war period. The course will conclude its historical survey with a
consideration of Berlin's position as a capital in reunified Germany. The historical survey will be
supplemented by a study of Berlin's urban structure, its significant architecture from the eighteenth
century (i.e. Schinkel) to the nineteenth (new worker's housing, garden suburbs) and twentieth
centuries (Bauhaus, Speer designs, postwar rebuilding, GDR housing projects, post-unification
building boom). In addition, we will read literary texts about the city, and consider the visual art and
music created in and about Berlin. Indeed, Berlin will be a specific example to explore German history
and cultural life of the last 300 years.
The course will be interdisciplinary with the fields of German Studies, history, history of art, and
urban studies. It is also designed as a preparation for undergraduate students who are considering
spending a junior semester with the Penn Abroad Program in Berlin.
240. Education in American Culture. (A) Staff.
This course explores the relationships between forms of cultural production and transmission
(schooling, family and community socialization, peer group subcultures and media representations)
and relations of inequality in American society. Working with a broad definition of "education" as varied
forms of social learning, we will concentrate particularly on the cultural processes that produce as well
as potentially transform class, race, ethnic and gender differences and identities. From this vantage
point, we will then consider the role that schools can and/or should play in challenging inequalities in
America.
SM 242. (ANTH252) Food Habits in Phil Comm. (C)
L/R 244. (COML254, GRMN244) Metropolis: Culture of the City. (M) Arts & Letters Sector. All
Classes. MacLeod. All lectures and readings in English
An exploration of modern discourses on and of the city. Topics include: the city as site of avant-garde
experimentation; technology and culture; the city as embodiment of social order and disorder; traffic
and speed; ways of seeing the city; the crowd; city figures such as the detective, the criminal, the
flaneur, the dandy; film as the new medium of the city. Special emphasis on Berlin. Readings by,
among others, Dickens, Poe, Baudelaire, Rilke, Doeblin, Marx, Engels, Benjamin, Kracauer. Films
include Fritz Lang's Metropolis and Tom Tykwer's Run Lola Run.
SM 250. Urban Public Policy: Philadelphia -- A Case Study. (B) Donna Cooper.
An introduction to a broad range of substantive policy areas affecting the city, and an exploration into
the complexities of policy formulation and implementation in a large and pluralistic metropolitan setting.
The course subtitle, "Philadelphia -- A Case Study," describes our approach. Donna Cooper currently
leads the region's foremost child advocacy organization focused on poverty, child welfare and
education issues, she formerly served as the Deputy Mayor for Policy for the City of Philadelphia, and
Secretary of Policy of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

Page 9 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
SM 259. Post Industrial City: Media City -- New Lifestyles, New Forms. (B) Thomas, Snyder.
Previously URBS 429
The stereotypical idea of the city or urban life is neither fixed nor singular. Lifestyle and urban form
evolve together in an iterative fashion affected by changes in technology, communication, economics
and cultural, social, political values. This seminar examines the underlying forces that are continuing to
transform urban form and the relationship of these forces to contemporary urban lifestyles. Lifestyle
choices have become an engine of urban growth and are instrumental in the transformation of urban
life and form of the city. The spatialization of contemporary life and the physical forms and fabric that
support it call into question traditional definitions of 'urban life' and 'city form.' The seminar's broad
context is the interface between the physical/psychological permanence of the existing traditional city
and the changing spatial and cultural landscape of a new urban realm defined by consumption culture,
new technologies and the media age.
The research focus for Spring 2015 will be the transformation of Brooklyn neighborhoods from
industrial working class centers to enclaves of hipster lifestyles. Hipsters have become commodified
and part of the commercial world but their role as urban shapers who put forth new values, new urban
lifestyles and new urban character has left a mark on neighborhoods from economic revival to
gentrification. Hipsters wield a combination of technology, values and cultural forces that together are
transforming urban places. Many of these underlying values have become the province as well of
educated middle-class population often living ideologically. We propose these groups are the seeds of
new types of consciousness united by shared values that have the potential to provide an alternative
vision for an urban domain that balances a long-term view with more temporal individual choices.
SM 252. Urban Journalism. (B) Rubin.
This course will examine the state of urban journalism today with special emphasis on how large
newspapers are redefining themselves, and the news, in an era of dwindling readership and growing
financial pressures. The course will look at online journalism, ethics, and alternative sources of news,
and will explore the techniques journalists use in reporting the news. Students will report and write four
pieces of their own about Philadelphia and its environs. The course is taught by Dan Rubin, Enterprise
Editor of The Philadelphia Inquirer, The Daily News and philly.com.
SM 253. (SOCI254) Cities, Suburbs, Regions. (J) Black.
This course will explore the political, economic, social, and demographic forces impacting
development patterns in metropolitan areas, with a particular focus on Philadelphia. We will examine
the government policies, economic forces, and social attitudes that affect the way a region grows, and
the impact of these forces on poverty, equity and segregation. Specific topics to be discussed include
the factors that make a region competitive, the city's changing role in the region, the impact place has
on opportunity, and approaches to revitalizing and improving communities.
SM 255. (AFRC255, HIST255) Urban Neighborhoods. (M) Milestone.
The last several decades have witnessed a dramatic acceleration in the interconnection of cities
around the world. The globalization of the economy, the spread of communications technology, major
migrations between urban locations, increasing disparities between rich and poor, the dramatic growth
of the "culture industries", and the increasingly popular quest for "place making" through urban design
have all contributed to this process. This course will examine urban neighborhoods in the United
States and elsewhere in the world. In particular, class readings and discussions will explore the wide
range of ways (political, social, cultural; organized and informal) that individuals and institutions in
urban neighborhoods have reacted to global transformations and what effects and consequences
those reactions have precipitated.
SM 260. (EALC141, HIST233) World Cities. (M) Staff.
Topics vary; see department for current description

Page 10 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
SM 264. (SOCI264) Poverty, Race and Health. (M) Jaeger.
This course is designed to introduce students to current literature on race/ethnic difference in health
and mortality in the United States, covering such topics as explanations for why some race/ethnic
groups fare better than others, how inner city poverty and residential segregation may contribute to
racial/ethnic differences in health outcomes, and health of immigrants versus native-born populations.
Current policy debated and recent policy developments related to health are also briely discussed. The
course is organized as a seminar with a combination of lectures and class discussions.
SM 270. (CPLN676, SOCI270) The Immigrant City. (B) Society Sector. All classes. Vitiello, Domenic.
Immigration is among the most important yet controversial forces shaping cities, regions, and
neighborhoods. The diversity of immigrant and receiving communities means that the dynamics and
impacts of migration are varied and complex. This course examines the development of immigrant and
receiving communities in the urban and suburban United States. It surveys public policy and
community and economic development practices related to migration at the local, regional, national,
and trans-national scale. Class readings, discussions, and visits to Philadelphia's immigrant
neighborhoods explore themes including labor markets, housing experiences, political mobilization,
civil society, cultural preservation, and the built environment.
SM 272. Architecture, Location, and Class in Philadelphia, 1780-1930. (A) Thomas.
This course studies the architecture of Philadelphia from the perspectives of aesthetic and social
history. Relationships between architectural patronage, design and location, and community values will
be examined and their implications for understanding the built environment will be analyzed.
SM 280. (CRIM280, SOCI380) Neighborhood Dynamics of Crime. (B) Staff.
Crime varies in time, space and populations as it reflects ecological structures and the routine social
interactions that occur in daily life. Concentrations of crime can be found among locations, with
antisocial activities like assaults and theft occurring at higher rates because of the demographic makeup of people (e.g. adolescents) or conflicts (e.g. competing gangs), for reasons examined by ecological
criminology. Variation in socio-demographic structures (age, education ratios, and the concentration of
poverty) and the physical environment (housing segregation, density of bars, street lighting) predicts
variations between neighborhoods in the level of crime and disorder. Both ethnographic and
quantitative research methods are used to explore the connections between the social and physical
environment of areas and antisocial behavior.
SM 273. (AFRC145, ENGL145) Advanced Non-Fiction Writing. (M) Staff. This course is not open to
freshmen. Students wishing to take this course must submit a writing sample a part of the selection
process. May be repeated for credit with a different instructor.
Writing with a view to publication in the freelance sections of newspapers such as THE
PHILADELPHIA INQUIRER and THE NEW YORK TIMES, in magazines such as THE ATLANTIC and
THE NEW YORKER, and in the literary quarterlies and the journals of opinion. Among the areas likely
to be considered are writing as a public act, issues of taste and of privacy, questions of ethics and of
policy, methods of research and of checking, excerpting, marketing, and the realistic understanding of
assignments and of the publishing world. Student papers will be the basis of weekly editorial sessions,
with concentration on the language: how to render material literate, how to recognize and dispose of
padding and self-indulgence, how to tighten structure and amplify substance.
See the English Department's website at www.english.upenn.edu for a description of the current
offerings.

Page 11 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
SM 274. (THAR275) Advanced Topics in Theatre. (M) Fox, Ferguson, Malague, Mazer, Schlatter.
This course, with different topics, may be repeated for credit. Please look at the program website for
the current semester's topic(s).
This course will combine an intensive practical and intellectual investigation of some area of the
making of theatre: performance techniques, theatrical styles, a particular period of theatre history. For
the current topics contact the Theatre Arts office or visit the website.
One section of 275 every other Spring will consist of a small number of Theatre Arts majors
selected by the faculty to become members of "the Edinburgh Project." This ensemble will mount a
production that will be performed at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe in August. Many of the readings and
exercises in this course will be geared to prepare for production; rehearsals for the project will continue
after the exam period at the end of the semester.
SM 275. The Idea of the City in History. Gaige.
This course will examine the idea of the city in history and how that idea has changed over time. We
will use literature, philosophy, sociology, and history to explore the ways writers and thinkers have
defined and characterized the city and what these definitions reflect in terms of values, assumptions,
and knowledge through changing times - as well as how the definitions have been contested.
For Aristotle the city was the inevitable consequence of people's inherent sociability, and as such
was a natural, positive agent of acculturation and education. For others, such as Jefferson, Emerson,
Thoreau, Melville, and Poe - members of the American literacy and political pantheon all - cities
embodied the crystallization of moral ruin. Others fell somewhere in between. Thus for Walt Whitman
and Jane Addams, cities had numerous defects but also contained the seeds of their own flowering
and renaissance. Members of the golden age of urban studies - Lewis Mumford, Jane Jacobs, and the
Chicago School - offered new insights and empirical tools for thinking about cities, and we will examine
their contributions as well. More contemporaneously, some critics of globalization locate cities at the
epicenter of their discontent with modernity while others view cities as a locus for a revitalized form of
citizenship.
In this course, we will examine each of these perspectives, with the goal of cultivating a deeper and
broader understanding of the many ways the idea of the city has played a leading role in fostering rich
debate about how and where humans should live their lives.
SM 290. Metropolitan Nature. (A) Nairn.
In order to understand the complex and often skewed relationship between the built and natural
systems, we must think in processes and examine different scales simultaneously. The course
explores urban sustainability and resilience. At its core, sustainability is a radical concept that
integrates the economy, equity (social justice), and the environment. Co-opted by marketing slogans,
stripped of meaning and context, it has become vague and pliable. Sustainability and resilience
demand a holistic systems view of the world. The course focuses on communities such as New
Orleans and Eastwick where urban development has focused on economic concerns at the expense
of the environment and equity resulting in unintended, and sometimes, catastrophic consequences.
Students will have the opportunity to interact with community residents who have organized to develop
strategies to address these ongoing issues.
SM 294. (ANTH294) CITIES OF THE FUTURE. (M)
SM 312. (ANTH312, HSOC321) Health in Urban Communities. (A) Johnston.
This course will introduce students to anthropological approaches to health and to theories of
participatory action research. This combined theoretical perspective will then be put into practice using
West Philadelphia community schools as a case study. Students will become involved in design and
implementation of health-related projects at an urban elementary or middle school. As one of the
course requirements, students will be expected to produce a detailed research proposal for future
implementation.

Page 12 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
SM 322. (FNAR222, FNAR622) The Big Picture: Mural Arts in Philadelphia. (C) Golden/Walinsky.
Previously URBS 222. The Undergraduate Fine Arts Department will now include a $75 fee for this
course.
The history and practice of the contemporary mural movement couples step-by- step analysis of the
process of designing with painting a mural. In addition, students will learn to see mural art as a tool for
social change. This course combines theory with practice. Students will design and paint a large
outdoor mural in West Philadelphia in collaboration with Philadelphia high school students and
community groups. The instructor, Jane Golden, is the founder and Director of the Philadelphia Mural
Arts Program.
320. (GAFL509, PSCI320) Who Gets Elected and Why? The Science of Politics. (A) Rendell.
What does it take to get elected to office? What are the key elements of a successful political
campaign? What are the crucial issues guiding campaigns and elections in the U.S. at the beginning of
the 21st century? This class will address the process and results of electoral politics at the local, state,
and federal levels. Course participants will study the stages and strategies of running for public office
and will discuss the various influences on getting elected, including: Campaign finance and
fundraising, demographics, polling, the media, staffing, economics, and party organization. Each week
we will be joined by guest speakers who are nationally recognized professionals, with expertise in
different areas of the campaign and election process. Students will also analyze campaign case
studies and the career of the instructor himself. Edward G. Rendell is the former Mayor of Philadelphia,
former Chair of the Democratic National Committee, and former Governor of Pennsylvania.
SM 321. (ANTH320, COMM320) Urban Ethnography: Documenting The City of Brotherly Love.
Jackson.Prerequisite(s): COMM 220 or permission of instructor.
How do qualitative social scientists study urban communities? What kinds of powerful tales can be told
about urban lifestyles and social issues/conflicts in places like Philadelphia? This course will allow
students to study various ethnographic treatments of urban communities in the United States, using
films, articles, TV serials, and books as guides for the framing of their own independent research on
the streets of Philadelphia. Students will also form production teams of two or three people, and these
production teams will be responsible for (i) identifying and researching an important urban issue in
contemporary Philadelphia and (ii) turning that research into a 15-30 minute radio documentary that
will be broadcast on a local Philadelphia radio station, WURD 900AM. Mixing radio/audio journalism
with ethnographic methods, will enhance their skills at archival and social research, participantobservation, interviewing techniques, sound editing, and production. This course is intended to be a
rigorous and exciting opportunity for students to tell empirically grounded stories using the voices of
their subjects and the sounds of the city.
Potential texts include: Sidewalk (a book and documentary film my Mitchell my Mitchell Duneier),
Righteous Dopefiend (a book and museum exhibit by Philippe Bourgois), and excerpts from other
ethnographic work by Ana Ramos-Zayas, Elijah Anderson, Todd Wolfson, David Grazian, Setha Low,
Ulf Hannerz, Leith Mullings, John Gwaltney, Dana-ain Davis, Carol Stack, Melissa Checker, Katherine
S. Newman, and others. By Permission Only.
SM 323. (EDUC323) Tutoring in Urban Public Schools: Theory and Practice. (A) Parker, Cheryl.
This course represents an opportunity for undergraduate students to participate in academically based
community service involving tutoring in a West Philadelphia public school. This course will serve a
need for those students who are already tutoring through the West Philadelphia Tutoring Project or
other campus tutoring, and it will also be available to individuals who are interested in tutoring for the
first time.

Page 13 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
SM 326. (EDUC326) Tutoring in Urban Public Elementary Schools: A Child Development
Perspective. (B) Fantuzzo.
The course provides an opportunity for undergraduate students to participate in academically based
community service learning. Student will be studying early childhood development and learning while
providing direct, one-to-one tutoring services to young students in Philadelphia public elementary
schools. The course will cover foundational dimensions of the cognitive and social development of
preschool and elementary school students from a multicultural perspective. The course will place a
special emphasis on the multiple contexts that influence children's development and learning and how
aspects of classroom environment (i.e., curriculum and classroom management strategies) can impact
children's achievement. Also, student will consider a range of larger issues impacting urban education
embedded in American society. The course structure has three major components: (1) lecture related
directly to readings on early childhood development and key observation and listening skills necessary
for effective tutoring, (2) weekly contact with a preschool or elementary school student as a volunteer
tutor and active consideration of how to enhance the student learning, and (3) discussion and
reflection of personal and societal issues related to being a volunteer tutor in a large urban public
school.
SM 327. (ASAM321, EDUC410) Schools and Community Development. (C) Puckett/Simon. First
class meeting is in McNeil 130. Subsequent classes will meet at West Philadelphia High School;
transportation will be provided.
This seminar engages Penn undergraduates with West Philadelphia High School teachers and
students to assist in planning an uban studies academy at both the existing and the proposed new
high school. This planning includes developing curricular activities, mapping institutional resources to
support curriculum development, and designing school-based public works projects.
SM 359. (ANTH359) Nutritional Anthropology. (M) Johnston.
Human nutrition and nutritional status within context of anthropology, health, and disease. Particular
emphasis on nutritional problems and the development of strategies to describe, analyze, and solve
them. Students will participate in the Urban Nutrition Initiative, an academically based community
service project in local area schools.
SM 330. (URBS530) GIS Applications in Social Science. (A) Hillier. Fulfills the Qualitative Data
Analysis Requirement
This course will introduce students to the principles behind Geographic Information Science and
applications of (GIS) in the social sciences. Examples of GIS applications in social services, public
health, criminology, real estate, environmental justice, education, history, and urban studies will be
used to illustrate how GIS integrates, displays, and facilitates analysis of spatial data through maps
and descriptive statistics. Students will learn to create data sets through primary and secondary data
collection, map their own data, and create maps to answer research questions. The course will consist
of a combination of lecture and lab.

Page 14 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
SM 332. Digital City: Approaches to Urban Memory & Cartography. (M) Farber.
Cities have existed through time with layered histories. Such histories are intelligible to dwellers of
urban space in the present who seek them out and others who by default interact with the effects of
memory through art and culture. Through the expansion of digital mapping tools, location-enabled
devices, online sharing sites, and social media memes, those layers of urban memory are newly
accessible and thus enhance experiences and explorations in a city. How do websites and apps
devoted to mapping cities across space and time help us access and redefine the cultures of cities?
What approaches, programs, and philosophies do the newfangled mapmakers and their co-creators
use, and how do they differ from analog approaches to research and placemaking? What are the
possibilities and responsibilities of such digital cartographies and locales? Where and for whom do the
digital divides still exist?
In "Digital City: Approaches to Urban Memory and Cartography," we will seek solutions to these
prompts by conducting case studies of digital map projects from transnational and local perspectives,
including a particular focus on Philadelphia-based sites. Students will gain skills in cultural analysis
and the digital humanities, and will produce a final research project that will result in a website, mobile
app, or critical assignment of their own direction mapping a city's past onto its present or future
spaces.
SM 352. (ANTH252) Food Habits in Philadelphia Communities: Exploring Eating and Changing
Food Habits in Philadelphia Middle Schools. (C) Kauer.
In this course, Penn undergraduates will explore and examine food habits, the intersection of culture,
family, history, and the various meanings of food and eating, by working with a middle-school class in
the Philadelphia public schools. The goal of the course will be to learn about the food habits of a
diverse local community, to explore that community's history of food and eating, and to consider ways
and means for understanding and changing food habits. Middle school students will learn about the
food environment and about why culture matters when we talk about food. Topics include traditional
and modern foodways, ethnic cuisine in America, food preferences, and 'American cuisine'. The
course integrates classroom work about food culture and anthropological practice with frequent trips to
middle school where undergraduates will collaborate with students, their teachers, and a teacher
partner from the Agatson Urban Nutrition Initiative (UNI). Students will be required to attend one of two
time blocks each week to fulfill the service learning requirement-times TBA.
Undergraduates will be responsible for weekly writing assignments responding to learning
experience in the course, for preparing materials to use middle school children, being participantlearners with the middle school children, and for a final research project. The material for the course
will address the ideas underlying university-community engagement, the relationships that exist
between food/eating and culture, and research methods.
367. (HIST367, SOCI367) Philadelphia, 1700-2000. (M) Sugrue.
Using Philadelphia as a lens, this course will examine the transformation of American cities from the
colonial period to the present. Through readings, lectures, and tours, we will consider urbanization and
suburbanization, race, class, and ethnicity, economic development, poverty and inequality, housing
and neighborhood change, urban institutions, and politics and public policy.

Page 15 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
SM 390. Urban Agriculture. (L) Nairn.
Urban Agriculture is a growing global trend. This course examines urban agriculture as an issue of
sustainablity, social justice, public health, and vacant land. It explores the potential of urban agriculture
in both the Global North and South to provide a safe and secure source of food to city residents. Major
topics include sustainable agricultural practices, operational and spatial requirements, distribution
systems, and access to fresh food. Using Philadelphia as a laboratory, the course explores its robust
agricultural scene of community gardens, guerilla gardens, and entrepreneurial farms, as well as its
distribution system including programs such as City harvest, the emerging Common Market, and
established farmers' markets. The course will integrate lectures about sustainable agricultural practices
with field trips to and hands-on work at community gardens and farms.
SM 400. Senior Seminar. (A) Schneider/Simon.Prerequisite(s): URBS 200; URBS 300.
Urban Studies senior research project
SM 404. (NPLD797) Philanthropy & The City. (A) Bauer/Goldman.
This course will focus on how urban communities are shaped by the nonprofit sector and the billions of
philanthropic dollars that fuel their work. By bridging theory and practice, the class explores what
dynamics are at play to deliver vital services or programs in healthcare, education, the arts,
community development, and other issues. The course will also focus on these important questions:
(1) Whose responsibility is the public good? How is that responsibility shared by the public, private,
and nonprofit sectors? and (2) Given that responsibility for the public good, which individuals and
groups make the decisions about how to serve the public good? How are these decisions made, and
who benefits from these decisions? Students will consider these questions in an interdisciplinary
context that will bring a historical and philosophical perspective to the examination of the values and
institutions that characterize the contemporary philanthropy and the nonprofit sector.
SM 401. URBAN STUDIES HONORS. (B) Schneider / Simon.Prerequisite(s): URBS 400.
Students in the fall Urban Studies Senior Seminar (URBS400) whose papers are exceptional and
show promise for publication will be invited to participate in the spring honors seminar. If they choose
to participate, honors seminar participants will revise and refine their research/papers with the goal of
their work for publication in an academic journal relevant to the topic. The seminar meets periodically
during the semester, structured around a set of assignments geared to facilitate the process of
revision. Students will be assigned to read each other's work and meetings take the form of a
workshop with students reporting on progress and providing feedback to improve and develop each
other's papers. In addition to completing the revised paper for a grade, participants in the honors
seminar are required to present their work to a wider Urban Studies audience in a special session at
the end of the semester and to provide documentation that they have submitted their papers for
publication. Students who successfully complete the honors seminar will graduate with distinction in
the major, noted on their transcripts and in the graduation materials.
SM 402. The City and Homelessness. (L) Freiherr Von Mahs.
This seminar in Urban Studies introduces students to many of the major social issues confronting our
nation's cities by focusing specifically on the problem of urban homelessness. The course examines
the treatment of homelessness and extreme impoverishment as social problems historically, as well as
through contemporary debates. Several areas of intensive study will include: the low income housing
crisis, welfare reform and income maintenance strategies, health care issues, and urban/suburban
relationships. Particular attention is also paid to the structure of emergency services for people who
have housing emergencies. The course concludes by examining current policies and advocacy
strategies.

Page 16 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
SM 403. (CPLN506, GAFL472, SOCI430, SOCI530) Urban Oral Histories, Voice and Storytelling.
Cory Fischer-Hoffman.
This course introduces students to the historical study of sound, soundscapes, and sound recordings,
aural history composition techniques (especially radio documentaries), and oral history as a
documentary practice. Designed as a theory and methods workshop, this course will cover theory,
ethics, interview techniques and project design along with recording tutorials, interview opportunities
and an introduction to digital audio editing. We explore Oral History's rich past while working to define
and expand its future as a dynamic research method. The class will include analysis of audio
documentary forms and non-fiction storytelling techniques, 20th and 21st century historical radio
documentary work, and archival audio source research. Theoretical readings draw from the fields of
Oral History, Media Studies and Urban Studies as well as the fields of Psychoanalysis, Trauma
Studies, and Anthropology. This course is well suited for those interested in ethnography, multimedia
journalism, social advocacy, and/or narrative nonfiction, as well as documentarians who want to learn
new approaches to interviewing and storytelling.
SM 405. (AFRC405, RELS439) Religion, Social Justice & Urban Development. (B) Lamas.
Urban development has been influenced by religious conceptions of social and economic justice.
Progressive traditions within Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Buddhism, Hinduism, Jainism, Baha'i,
Humanism and other religions and systems of moral thought have yielded powerful critiques of
oppression and hierarchy as well as alternative economic frameworks for ownership, governance,
production, labor, and community. Historical and contemporary case studies from the Americas,
Europe, Africa, Asia, and the Middle East will be considered, as we examine the ways in which
religious responses to poverty, inequality, and ecological destruction have generated new forms of
resistance and development.
SM 409. (ANTH305, ANTH609) Anthropology & Policy: History, Theory, Practice. (B) Suess.
From the inception of the discipline, anthropologists have applied their ethnographic and theoretical
knowledge to policy issues concerning the alleviation of practical human problems. This approach has
not only benefited peoples in need but it has also enriched the discipline, providing anthropologists
with the opportunity to develop new theories and methodologies from a problem-centered approach.
The class will examine the connection between anthropology and policy, theory and practice (or
'praxis'), research and application. We will study these connections by reading about historical and
current projects. As an ABCS course, students will also volunteer in a volunteer organization of their
choice in the Philadelphia area, conduct anthropological research on the organization, and suggest
ways that the anthropological approach might support the efforts of the organization.
SM 417. Cities and Sustainability. (M) Ben-Amos.
A good idea is not enough - developing innovative and sustainable projects in cities requires
understanding "how to get things done." Developing projects to promote sustainability in major US
cities requires sensitivity to the political and operational context within which cities implement
innovative initiatives. Cities and Sustainability uses Philadelphia as a case study to explore the issues
confronting modern American metropolises as they look to manage their resources and promote
environmentally friendly policies. URBS 417 will introduce students to leading Philadelphia
practitioners of sustainability and municipal projects. Students will be given the tools to politically,
economically and critically analyze various sustainable policy initiatives across the United States.

Page 17 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
SM 410. (FNAR201, SWRK510, URBS510) Urban Communities and the Arts: Research & Policy.
(M) Stern. This course may not be counted as a required studio course for Fine Arts major and minor
This course will explore methods for examining the role that arts and cultural activities play in urban
communities and its implications for urban policy. The course will focus on: 1) examining theories of
culture's social impact and how they might be used to formulate research; 2) methods for conducting
research on arts and culture; and 3) how cultural research is relevant for various spheres of urban
policy, including community development, urban economies, and the needs of children and youth. The
major project for the course will require students to collaborate with community resources in studying
the connection of theory, research, and policy.
412. Building Non-Profits from the Ground Up. (L) Goldman.
This course will cover the basic elements of building and growing a non-profit organization, including
the development of the mission and the board; needs assessment, program design, development, and
management; financial management, contract compliance and understanding an audit; fundraising,
public, foundation, corporate, and individual; communication and marketing; organizational
administration (including staff and volunteer selection, management and development); public policy,
research and advocacy. Students will engage in field assignments and role play, in addition to research
and writing.
SM 415. Urban Real Estate Markets. (B) Kozloff.
Cities evolve over time, comprised of various inputs of different sizes at different stages of urban
evolution. However, as cities continue to densify and navigate real estate market cycles, opportunities
to redefine the urban context, while promoting the individual brand, become ever more sensitive.
Projects are increasingly complex, often involving multiple partnerships among private developers,
public agencies, non-profits, and community groups. Today's development professionals need to be
well-versed across a variety of disciplines and property types to effectively execute in an urban
environment. As an introductory course in real estate development, this course will provide the
underpinnings for critical decision-making in markets that change frequently and often unevenly whether for financing, investing, development, public policy formulation, or asset management/
disposition.
419. Transportation & American Society. Ben-Amos.
Transportation affects every aspect of American society; from how we get to work or school, to how we
shop and play. Transportation policy at all levels of American government has serious implications for
social justice and economic development. Moreover, some of today's most intense political battles
center on transportation policy across America and within its cities, be it funding High Speed Rail in
California or placing bike lanes in the heart of Manhattan. Transportation and American Society will
expose students to the role transportation has played the development of America and its cities as well
as its impact on politics and society.

Page 18 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
SM 420. (HIST440, SOCI420) Perspectives on Urban Poverty. (C) Fairbanks.
This course provides an interdisciplinary introduction to 20th century urban poverty, and 20th century
urban poverty knowledge. In addition to providing an historical overview of American poverty, the
course is primarily concerned with the ways in which historical, cultural, political, racial, social, spatial/
geographical, and economic forces have either shaped or been left out of contemporary debates on
urban poverty. Of great importance, the course will evaluate competing analytic trends in the social
sciences and their respective implications in terms of the question of what can be known about urban
poverty in the contexts of social policy and practice, academic research, and the broader social
imaginary. We will critically analyze a wide body of literature that theorizes and explains urban poverty.
Course readings span the disciplines of sociology, anthropology, urban studies, history, and social
welfare. Primacy will be granted to critical analysis and deconstruction of course texts, particularly with
regard to the ways in which poverty knowledge creates, sustains, and constricts meaningful channels
of action in urban poverty policy and practice interventions.
SM 421. Exploring Creativity. Berman.
Creativity isn't just for artists and inventors. It's an integral aspect of excelling at many jobs. It's
problem solving. Recent studies have pointed to creativity as an important factor for achievement in a
variety of fields. Additional studies have discussed how creativity can be enhanced in people of any
age. This seminar-studio will challenge you with various projects to push your creative skills. No
previous art experience is required. We'll also include guest speakers and walking tours. The core
premise of this class is that creativity is within all of us. By the end of the class, your understanding of
creativity should be deeper, and your personal creativity, enhanced.
SM 431. Mapping Philadelphia. Paul Farber.
Philadelphia is a city that was mapped before it was built. Founder William Penn's original concept for
the gridded city continues to inform the historical evolution of Philadelphia, even as city planners,
architects, artists, and social justice activists work to transform the layers of our built environment. This
class will study the city through a variety of archival maps, historical mapping practices, and emergent
digital approaches to representing space and time. We will explore public history projects that seek
approaches to place-making and place-keeping at neighborhood intersections, share dialogue with
social practice artists who produce site- specific works, and visualize civic data through platforms such
as OpenDataPhilly. Each student will pursue a final research project resulting in a close study of a
particular street or intersection in the city.
SM 423. Fantastic Citites: Urban Landscapes Seen Through Memory Imagination and Dreams.
(L) Svendsen.
This seminar introduces the notion of the city, or polis, as a powerful current in our cultural imagination.
In contemporary discourse, cities have an edge of glamour: they elicit both fear and desire. Historically,
however, cities have been understood as microcosmic models of the organization of human society; a
walled city was a place of safety and order, not a site of danger or chaos. This course explores
different moments in the cultural fantasies surrounding cities, paying special attention to topics such as
the role of the imagination in experiencing cities, historical urban strata, subways and other
subterranean spaces below the modern city, urban peripheries, and the modern aesthetic of
transparency. The course focuses on representations of some actual cities -- Rome, Berlin, New York,
London, Lagos -- as well as a series of utopian and dystopian imagined cities.

Page 19 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
SM 427. (FOLK513) URBAN ETHNOGRAPHY. (M) Saverino.
Cities can be exciting, dense, noisy, and dirty. They are places where the unexpected is expected to
occur. One thing is certain however - urban settings are always full of the diversity of human
expressivity. Through readings, videos, guest lectures, and field trips, this course explores the
symbolic meanings and social production of urban life and culture in Philadelphia, the nation's fifth
largest city. The urban landscape provides an intensification of cultural processes. How humans
experience them are more easily studied and understood in an urban setting, giving this class the
opportunity to explore social relational and cultural themes such as the ethnic city, the contested city,
the global city, and the creative city. This course is structured as a seminar with readings from
Philadelphia and other urban settings that introduce students to the study of the city as a site of
everyday practice. In addition, the course offers step-by-step training in conducting an ethnographic
fieldwork project on an urban topic of the student's interest.
SM 428. (CPLN528) Research Seminar in 21st Century Urbanism. (B) Ehlenz.
A seminar run in conjunction with the Institute for Urban Research at Penn, students will learn about
the range of cutting-edge topics in urbanism that Penn faculty are working on and work closely with a
faculty member on current research. Students will learn about new topics and methods in
interdisciplinary urban research, and get first hand experience collecting urban data under the close
supervision of an experienced researcher. Students and faculty jointly will present their findings for
discussion. This course is a good introduction for how to frame and conduct an urban research project.
435. URBAN SOCIAL THEORY.
SM 438. (SOCI438) SOCIAL SCIENCE STUDIO: IMMIGRANTS MAKE THE CITY. (M) Choudhury,
Kushanava.
How do American cities grow? Studies of urban transformation have focused on anchor institutions,
the growth model of big business-generated employment, and "creative class" gentrification. After
decades of decline, many major cities like Philadelphia are seeing gains in population again, as well
as new commercial activity and street life, spurred by the influx of new immigrant communities. Yet few
scholars have asked: What role do immigrants play in the current revival of the American metropolis?
In this Social Science Studio course, 16 students will work collaboratively as in a design studio to
conduct research that can answer this important social-scientific question. Students will work on
independent projects that engage multiple methods and fields to produce new types of knowledge.
They will be introduced to multiple methods drawn from architecture, planning, anthropology and
political science, including mapping, interviewing, field notes, socio-economic surveys, sketching,
photography and web design to develop independent projects. No prior knowledge is required but
students with experience in GIS, STATA, photography, drawing or web design are encouraged to apply.
This course is pending for an ABCS designation.

Page 20 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
SM 439. Suatainability and the Urban Neighborhood. Berman.
This studio style class will follow the method of a traditional architecture and city planning studio, in
that the learning will occur while students do a simulated project. A specific neighborhood in
Philadelphia will be chosen and students will examine the neighborhood in detail, focusing on the
different aspects that comprise the concept of sustainability. This will include issues of density, diversity
of uses, transportation, livability, environmentally sustainable buildings, food accessibility,
environmentally sustainable materials, and education. It will also look into issues related to social
sustainability and social diversity.
Students will have two main projects within the semester. The first is to analyze the chosen
neighborhood, in terms of the different aspects of sustainability. The second is to create guidelines to
lead it towards a more sustainable future. Definitions of sustainability will be explored throughout this
process. As each component of sustainability is examined within the context of the chosen
neighborhood, it will simultaneously be explored in readings, class discussions, guest lectures and
tours.
451. (CPLN625, GAFL569) The Politics of Housing and Urban Development. (A) Kromer.
This course offers an exploration of how legislative action, government policymaking, and citizen
advocacy influence plans for the investment of public capital in distressed urban neighborhoods.
Course topics this semester will include an evaluation of the results of City of Philadelphia
development policies under the administration of Mayor Michael A. Nutter, an assessment of a largescale property acquisition and development strategy being implemented by the Philadelphia Housing
Authority in North Philadelphia, and a review of recent and current reinvestment plans for Camden's
waterfront and downtown-area neighborhoods.
L/R 440. (CPLN500) Introduction to City Planning: Past, Present and Future. (A) Vitiello or
Ammon.
Orientation to the profession, tracing the evolution of city and regional planning from its late nineteenth
century roots to its twentieth century expression. Field trips included.
SM 448. (AFRC448) Neighborhood Displacement & Community Power. (B) Palmer.
This course uses the history of black displacement to examine community power and advocacy. It
examines the methods of advocacy (e.g. case, class, and legislative) and political action through which
community activists can influence social policy development and community and institutional change.
The course also analyzes selected strategies and tactics of change and seeks to develop alternative
roles in the group advocacy, lobbying, public education and public relations, electoral politics, coalition
building, and legal and ethical dilemmas in political action. Case studies of neighborhood displacement
serve as central means of examining course topics.
SM 450. Urban Redevelopment. (B) Rachlin, Andrew.
This course will consider urban redevelopment from the early 20th century to present day, looking at
ways the economic, political, and social underpinnings of redevelopment practice have changed over
that time. From the City Beautiful movement to Transit Oriented Development, the course will look at
why and how the public, private, and non-profit sectors have intervened in urban neighborhoods, and
will contemplate consequences - positive and negative - of those interventions. Students will be
introduced to some of the technical aspects of redevelopment, including architecture/design, planning,
and financing. The class will be in seminar format, mixing lecture, discussion, and guest speakers. The
course requirements include a mid-term paper, an in-class charrette, and a final development project.
Andrew Rachlin is the Managing Director of Lending and Investment at the Reinvesment Fund. Before
TRF he served as the Deputy Chief of Staff for Economic Development for the City of Philadelphia,
and has also served as an aide to the Executive Director of the Port Authority of NY and NJ.

Page 21 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
SM 452. Community Economic Development. (A) Lamas.
Community economic development concerns the revitalization of impoverished communities. As with
all things economic, poor and working people may be the subjects or the objects of development. We
will utilize case studies from Philadelphia and around the world in an exploration of various models of
economic justice and sustainable development.
SM 453. (SOCI453, URBS543) Metropolitan Growth and Poverty. (M) Madden.
This course analyzes the role of metropolitan regions in the U.S. and global economies, including the
sources of metropolitan productivity, the ways that metropolitan structures affect residents, and
analyses of public policy in metropolitan areas. The economic, political, and social forces that have
shaped World War II urban and regional development are explored, including technology, demography,
and government. Special attention is paid to how metropolitan change affects residents by income and
race. Topics include: gentrification, schools, suburbanization, sprawl, metropolitan fragmentation,
concentration of poverty, race, and various economic revitalization initiatives.
SM 454. (SWRK712, URBS554) City Limits: The Impact of Urban Policy. (B) Goldstein,
Stern.Prerequisite(s): Student must have taken an introduction to research methods course.
This course assesses the changing role of public policy in American cities. In the past, government
often believed that it could direct urban development. New realities - the rise of an informal labor
market, global capital and labor flows, the flight of businesses and the middle class to the suburbs have demonstrated that government must see itself as one - but only one - 'player' in a more complete,
transactional process of policy making that crosses political boundaries and involves business,
organized interest groups, and citizens.
This seminar uses a case-study method to study how public policy can make a difference in the
revitalization of distressed American cities. The seminar is designed for advanced undergraduates and
graduate students. Seminar readings and projects will be organized around three themes: 1) history
and vision, 2) data and analysis, and 3) policy and implementation. Students will be divided into
project teams assigned to work on current development issues that will be reviewed by both public and
private-sector experts. Extensive use will be made of real estate, economic development, and social
indicator data to understand the complex forces at work in both large and small cities. Students will
learn to access, analyze, and map information; to frame and interpret these data within a regional
perspective; and to construct profiles of cities and neighborhoods. Students will study recent urban
redevelopment initiatives in the Philadelphia region, including Philadelphia's Neighborhood
Transformations Initiative and New Jersey's Camden Revitalization plans.
462. (HIST463) History of American Education. (B) Katz.
A survey of the history of American education from the Colonial Period to the present. Special
emphasis on the relations between education and major themes in social history.

Page 22 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
SM 457. (SOCI435) Globalization & The City. (M) Shankar.
Over the past two decades, the public imagination has been gripped by the concept of globalization.
Scholars, corporations, advertisers and government officials have latched onto this idea as a defining
feature of our current era. These various constituencies use globalization not only to account for
epochal shifts in our economy and society, but also to justify new types of business strategy and public
policy. This course will examine three interlinked dimensions of globalization: Global economic
processes (e.g. the transnational operations of multinational firms that have given rise to a new
international division of labor); cultural globalization (e.g. the spread of American brands like Coca
Cola, Nike and Hollywood films), and political globalization (e.g. the rise of supranational organizations
like the IMF, World Bank and WTO that promote the idea of free markets).
Moreover, we will study globalization in the context of cities because, given their centrality to
globalization processes, it is in cities that we can best understand how globalization takes place. In
cities, we can study the global economic processes that restructure urban space, giving rise to new
financial districts, international art exhibits and post-modern architecture and entrepreneurial
strategies that seek to elevate cities to world city status. The course will examine these processes in a
comparative light, contrasting urban globalization processes in Europe and North America with those
in Latin America, Asia and Africa.
SM 460. (AFRC460, EDUC712) School Reform and Public Policy. (A) Hershberg.
The course examines the reforms catalyzed by the federal "Race to the Top" competitive grant
program and by waivers from No Child Left Behind issued by the federal Department of Education;
and explores how these reforms resemble and differ from those mandated by NCLB. Charters,
vouchers and competition are discussed along with school governance and funding. Micro as well as
macro policy perspectives are provided through the instructor's ongoing work helping Houston's Aldine
Independent School District (the 2009 Broad Prize winner with 64,000 low-income and minority
students) design and pilot a new teacher evaluation system, a new compensation system, a "peer
assistance and and review" process for professional development, remediation and dismissal along
with related reforms.
SM 463. (ENVS463, URBS663) Brownfield Remediation: The Historical, Scientific, and Policy
Dimensions of "Brownfields" in Old Industrial Cities. (M) Keene.
This course gives an overview of the genesis of the so-called "Brownfield" problem and of the various
efforts that our society is taking to try to solve, or at least ameliorate it. The course will place the
"Brownfield" problem in the broader context of the growth and decline of industrial base cities like
Philadelphia. Students will study the general constitutional and statutory framework within which we
approach the problems of orphan, polluted sites and the disposal of contemporary solid wastes. They
will also analyze the principal actions that have been taken by federal and state governments to
address remediation and redevelopment of abandoned industrial sites. In addition, the course will
explore environmental equity issues.
SM 467. Global Cities in the 21st Century. (B) Birch.
A survey of worldwide urbanization, focusing on development disparities among cities in the Global
North and Global South and within each area, with special attention to the provision of housing, basic
infrastructure (water, sanitation, transportation) and social and health services.

Page 23 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
SM 470. (PSCI470) Executive Power in Metropolitan American Politics. (M) Rendell;Siskind.
Focusing on presidents, governors, and big-city mayors, this course will explore a wide range of
historical and recent examples of executive leadership and decision-making. How do their actions in
office shape and get shaped by long-term historical and political forces? How and why do executive
office holders use (and occasionally abuse) their power? What opportunities exist to transform both
policy and public opinion? What kinds of constraints circumscribe the options available and limit the
impact of executive choices? Exploring presidents such as Franklin Roosevelt, Lyndon Johnson and
Barack Obama, governors including Ronald Reagan, Nelson Rockefeller and Bill Clinton, and mayors
like Richard Daley, Sr. and Jr., Ed Koch, and Ed Rendell, this course at once examines the
personalities and predilections of individuals as well as the political ideas and institutions that shape
their time in office.
Registration in this course is by permission of the instructors only. To seek a permit for the course
please provide a short personal statement of not more than one page with the following information:
your name and contact information; your year; your major; other courses you have taken on related
subjects; how this course would fit into your larger academic and intellectual development; any other
personal or extenuating circumstances you think it would be useful for us to know about you. Email
personal statements to Peter Siskind (siskind@sas.upenn.edu) no later than April 3 and enrollment
decisions will be made by April 18.
SM 473. (HIST473, SOCI473) Community Organizing: History and Theory. (M) Fischer-Hoffman.
This course will integrate the history and theories of community organizing in order to provide each
student with the foundation to develop a transformational praxis for creating change in their own
communities. The class will include a focused analysis of theory, a historical examination of community
organizing in the labor movement, the civil rights movement and the disability rights movement, case
study reviews, guest speaker presentations and practical organizing skill-building. We will examine
social inequality and intersectionality and explore effective strategies in organizing for social change.
This course is inter-disciplinary and draws from political economy, sociology, history, social work, and
social movement theory. Students will have the option of doing a final project in collaboration with a
Philadelphia-based community organization.
SM 480. (AFRC480) Liberation and Ownership. (A) Lamas.
Who is going to own what we all have a part of creating? The history of the Americas, and of all
peoples everywhere, is an evolving answer to the question of ownership. Ownership is about: the ties
that bind and those that separate; production, participation, and control; the creation of community and
the imposition of hierarchies--racial, sexual, and others; dreams of possessing and the burdens of debt
and ecological despoliation; dependency and the slave yearning to breathe free. Of all the issues
relevant to democracy, oppression, injustice, and inequality, ownership is arguably the most important
and least understood. Utilizing a variety of disciplinary perspectives--with a particular emphasis on
radical and critical theories of liberation, and by focusing on particular global sites and processes of
capitalism, students will assess and refine their views regarding ownership and liberation in light of
their own social, political, religious, aesthetic, and ethical commitments.

Page 24 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
475. (THAR475) Public Performance Art in the Global Age. (M) Public Performance Art in the
Global Age. Master of Liberal Arts open to undergraduates.
Variously termed relational aesthetics, socially engaged art, or new genre public art, the exploding
global expansion and wildly proliferating forms of what this course will term public performance art is
one of the most exciting and consequential artistic, cultural, and political movements of the start of the
21st Century. This course will chart the history of this phenomenon from its radical origins in Futurism,
Constructivism, and Dada cabaret, through Happenings, the inter-disciplinary collaborations of Merce
Cunningham, Robert Rauschenberg, and Jasper Johns, site-specific and installation art, to current
practitioners around the world, such as Ai Weiwei, Thomas Hirschhorn, Marina Abramovic, and Christo
and Jeanne-Claude, among others. The course will outline the theoretical and philosophical
foundations of this work and the political controversies it has ignited. Special focus will be on the
engagement of this work with public space and contemporary urban life.
Course requirements include wide reading and class discussion, and oral presentations on artists,
collectives, and movements that have significantly shaped the current landscape. The course includes
a laboratory component in which students will have the opportunity to construct a performance art or
installation piece in campus public space. This public art piece will serve as site research for a final
paper. All students welcome. No previous experience or special expertise in the field required. Just
genuine interest or curiosity.
SM 476. BANKERS, ACTIVISTS, & GOVNT: THE MAKING OF URBAN HOUSING POLICY IN
AMERICA. (M) Stern, Goldstein.
This course examines how public policy influences housing markets and how markets influence public
policy. The course reviews the development of housing policy since World War II and how shifts in
policy have influenced people's ability to find suitable shelter. Topics include: poverty and affordability,
residential segregation / civil rights in housing, the financial crisis of 2008, mortgage foreclosure,
affordable housing, and homelessness. The course focuses on the changing roles of different levels of
government in housing policy and how the financial sector, the construction industry, and nongovernmental organizations influence Americans housing options.
SM 478. (CPLN678) Elements of a Sustainable Development Policy. Keene.
This course has several objectives. The central focus will be on developing a comprehensive
understanding of the principles of sustainable development, a broad, deep, and in fact, revolutionary
new way of shaping the operations of society. It was first defined in the 1987 Report of the United
Nations' World Commission in Environment and Development (the Brundtland Report) as: "...
development that meets the needs to the present without compromising the ability of future
generations to meet their own needs." The course will combine lectures on general concepts and ways
of viewing sustainable development with individuals and team presentations on a wide variety of
sustainable development programs. Students will examine the efforts of universities, companies, local
governments, state governments, and national governments to being to moderate man's impact of the
natural environment and to make societies more economically viable and just - and therefore, more
sustainable - in the long run. Students will learn how sustainable development strategies involve the
full range of human activities, such as energy production and use, creation of urban communities,
transportation, food systems, building construction and operation, waste disposal, control of
environmental pollution, water use and treatment, and social inclusion,
migration, and global poverty.
SM 483. (ANTH483) Interfaith Action.

Page 25 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
SM 501. (EDUC501) Community Partnerships in Visual Arts & Education. Epstein.
This course will connect students with artists from the 40th Street Artist-in-Residence (AIR) program,
which provides free studio space and in exchange asks residents to share their talents with the local
community. This course is designated as an Academic-based Service Learning (ABCS) class,
meaning that students will be evaluated partly on their work in the community outreach situation.
Course registration is open to advanced undergraduates.
SM 506. (URBS206) Public Environment of Cities: An Introduction to the Urban Landscape. (M)
Nairn.
This course will explore the role of public spaces - streets, boulevards, parks and squares - in cities
and their social uses. With the University of Pennsylvania campus and the City of Philadelphia serving
as our laboratory, we will critically examine the evolution of the movement of corridors, open space
and buildings of the urban landscape and their changing uses. Case studies of social spaces on
campus and public open spaces in Center City will help inform our understanding of how public
environment serves, well or poorly, the varying needs of diverse users. While graphic skills are not
required, graphic means as well as writing will be employed to communicate critical thought, ideas,
and conclusions.
SM 524. (CPLN624) Metro Labor Markets. (B) Wolf-Powers.
This course examines contemporary labor markets through two thematic lenses. One is the growing
discussion of knowledge industries and "knowledge workers" and their importance to regional
innovative capacity and competitive advantage in a global economy. The other is the persistent
challenge of unemployment, underemployment and working poverty within metropolitan regions. In
exploring these themes, readings for the class synthesize perspectives on work, labor markets and
economic growth from economics, sociology, history and political science. Class lecture and
discussion, supplemented by the occasional guest practitioner, will focus on translating academic
research into knowledge that can be used in local economic and community development practice.
SM 513. (FOLK513, URBS213) Urban Ethnography. Saverino.
Using Philadelphia as the site of students' praxis, this course explores the symbolic meanings and
social production of urban life and culture in the nation's fifth largest city. This course is structured as a
seminar with ethnographic background readings from Philadelphia and other urban settings to
introduce students to the study of the city as a site of everyday practice, as well as training in
conducting an ethnographic fieldwork project. The urban landscape provides an intensification of
macro processes such as globalization. Such processes and how humans experience them are more
easily studied and understood in an urban setting.
The class will explore social relational and cultural themes such as the ethnic city, the gendered city,
the contested city, the sacred city, the global city, and the aesthetic and expressive city. A diverse
range of reading assignments, images, and videos will augment our understandings of urban life.
Students will design and execute their own ethnographic fieldwork projects on an urban topic that
interests them. Through step-by-step instruction throughout the semester, students will learn
qualitative research techniques such as field notes, participant-observation, interviewing, and how to
interpret their own data, so that they will be able to complete their semester project.

Page 26 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
SM 516. (AFST516, ANTH516, GSWS516) Public Interest Workshop. (A) Suess.
This is a Public Interest Ethnography workshop (originally created by Peggy Reeves Sanday Department of Anthropology) that incorporates an interdisciplinary approach to exploring social issues.
Open to graduate and advanced undergraduate students, the workshop is a response to Amy
Gutmann's call for interdisciplinary cooperation across the University and to the Department of
Anthropology's commitment to developing public interest research and practice as a disciplinary
theme. Rooted in the rubric of public interest social science, the course focuses on: 1) merging
problem solving with theory and analysis in the interest of change motivated by a commitment to
social justice, racial harmony, equality, and human rights; and 2)engaging in public debate on human
issues to make the research results accessible to a broad audience. The workshop brings in guest
speakers and will incorporate original ethnographic research to merge theory with action. Students are
encouraged to apply the framing model to a public interest research and action topic of their choice.
This is an academically-based-community-service (ABCS) course that partners directly with Penn's
Netter Center Community Partnerships.
SM 519. (PSCI519) Cities in Global Econ.
SM 525. Prisons, Politics, and Activism. Cory Fischer-Hoffman.
The United States leads the world in imprisonment. More than 2.3 million people are locked up in
prisons and jails around the country, plus thousands more in immigrant detention centers. In this
course, students will develop an understanding of the U.S. prison system and its widespread,
differential impacts. We will utilize an inter-disciplinary approach that draws from critical theory, political
economy, history, geography and sociology as well as critical race and gender studies. We will
examine the social dynamics of incarceration and prison activism. Our readings and discussion will
include detailed attention to matters of race, class, gender, and sexuality. This class will be a readingand discussion-intensive seminar in which we will explore debates around the reform or abolition of
prisons and the recent increase in public attention to the problem of mass incarceration. Students will
learn about local prison activism and complete final projects that will focus on the mapping the
carceral geography of Philadelphia.
SM 530. (URBS330) GIS Applications in Social Science. (A) Hillier.
This course will introduce students to the principles behind Geographic Information Science and
applications of (GIS) in the social sciences. Examples of GIS applications in social services, public
health, criminology, real estate, environmental justice, education, history, and urban studies will be
used to illustrate how GIS integrates, displays, and facilitates analysis of spatial data through maps
and descriptive statistics. Students will learn to create data sets through primary and secondary data
collection, map their own data, and create maps to answer research questions. The course will consist
of a combination of lecture and lab.
547. (ANTH547, EDUC547) Anthropology & Education. (C) Hall or Posecznick.
An introduction to the intent, approach, and contribution of anthropology to the study of socialization
and schooling in cross-cultural perspective. Education is examined in traditional, colonial, and complex
industrial societies.

Page 27 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
SM 560. (URBS460) School Reform and Public Policy. (A) Hershberg.
This course will examine how changes in the global economy require America's schools to educate all
students to new and demanding standards, and will review the arguments why the current school
system, designed for a different economy and a different century, must be fundamentally reorganized if
the nation is to succeed in meeting its human capital development challenge.Topics covered will
include school funding and governance, the precedent-breaking federal legislation, No Child Left
Behind, and charter schools and the voucher movement. Students can effect real-world change
through research designed to elaborate the comprehensive school-reform model developed at Penn's
Operation Public Education, which is now being piloted in some of the nation's schools.
SM 554. (URBS454) City Limits: The Impact of Urban Policy. (B) Goldstein, Stern.Prerequisite(s):
Student must have taken a research methods course.
This course assesses the changing role of public policy in American cities. In the past, government
often believed that it could direct urban development. New realities - the rise of an informal labor
market, global capital and labor flows, the flight of businesses and the middle class to the suburbs have demonstrated that government must see itself as one - but only one - 'player' in a more complete,
transactional process of policy making that crosses political boundaries and involves business,
organized interest groups, and citizens.
This seminar uses a case study method to study how public policy can make a difference in the
revitalization of distressed American cities. The seminar is designed for advanced undergraduates and
graduate students. Seminar readings and projects will be organized around three themes: 1) history
and vision, 2) data and analysis, and 3) policy and implementation. Students will be divided into
project teams assigned to work on current development issues that will be reviewed by both public and
private-sector experts. Extensive use will be made of real estate, economic development, and social
indicator data to understand the complex forces at work in both large and small cities. Students will
learn to access, analyze, and map information; to frame and interpret these data within a regional
perspective; and to construct profiles of cities and neighborhoods. Students will study recent urban
redevelopment initiatives in the Philadelphia region - including Philadelphia's Neighborhood
Transformations Initiative and New Jersey's Camden Revitalization plans.
SM 608. (CPLN800, HIST608, SOCI608) Proseminar in Urban Studies. (E) Birch.
Open to PhD students, this scholar-oriented seminar explores how academic researchers from
different disciplines define researchable questions, craft research designs, and contribute to
knowledge through an examination of important and/or recently published books and monographs with
an urban focus. Required of all first- and second- year CPLN doctoral students and those doctoral
students enrolled in the Urban Studies Graduate Certificate Program, enrollment is limited to 15
students. Other doctoral students may enroll on a space available basis. Course requirements include
completion of a major research paper on a topic selected in consultation with the instructor.
619. (EDUC619) Critical Perpectives in Contemporary Urban Education. (C) Schultz.
The focus of this course is the conditions for teaching and learning in urban public schools, current
theories of pedagogy in urban education, and perspectives on urban reform efforts.
SM 623. (AFRC623, SOCI623) Workshop in Urban Ethnography. (M) Staff.
The ethnographic and sociological interpretation of urban life. Conceptual and methodological issues
will be thoroughly discussed. Ongoing projects of participants will be presented in a "workshop"
format, thus providing participants the opportunity of learning from and contributing to ethnographic
work in progress. Selected ethnographic works will be read and assessed.

Page 28 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
SM 624. (SOCI624) Race Relations in American Cities. (M) Staff.
The ethnographic study of race relations in the United States. The social life and culture of urban race
relations in the United States will be emphasized, stressing conceptual and methodological issues.
Selected ethnographic literature will be read and discussed. Students will be expected to carry out an
ethnographic site study.
SM 663. (ENVS463, ENVS663, URBS463) Brownfield Remediation: The Historical, Scientific, and
Policy Dimensions of Brownfields in Old Industrial Cities. (M) Keene.
This course gives an overview of the genesis of the so-called "Brownfield" problem and of the various
efforts that our society is taking to try to solve, or at least ameliorate it. The course will place the
"Brownfield" problem in the broader context of the growth and decline of industrial base cities like
Philadelphia. Students will study the general constitutional and statutory framework within which we
approach the problems of orphan, polluted sites and the disposal of contemporary solid wastes. They
will also analyze the principal actions that have been taken by federal and state governments to
address remediation and redevelopment of abandoned industrial sites. In addition, the course will
explore environmental equity issues.
SM 713. (EDUC712) Comprehensive School Reform as Applied Public Policy. (C) Hershberg.
This course examines how K-12 education policy is designed and implemented in the United States. It
uses a systems analysis as the framework for looking at who makes what kinds of demands on the
education policy system, how these demands are placed on the policy agenda, the decision making
process, and resulting education policies and policy outcomes. The course pays particular attention to
the roles of federal, state and local governments in education policy, and the impact of our
intergovernmental system on the design and implementation of policy. Students will also examine
major education policies and debate key education policy issues that arise at each level of
government.
SM 670. Ethnicity: The Immigrant City. (B)
Immigration is among the most important yet controversial forces shaping cities, regions, and
neighborhoods. The diversity of immigrant and receiving communities means that the dynamics and
impacts of migration are varied and complex. This course examines the development of immigrant and
receiving communities in the United States. It surveys public policy and community and economic
development practices related to migration at the local, regional, national, and trans-national scale.
Class readings, discussions, and visits to Philadelphia's immigrant neighborhoods explore themes
including labor markets, housing experiences, political mobilization, civil society, cultural preservation,
and the built environment.
The first half of the course surveys migration and community formation among a broad range of
ethnic groups in different parts of the city and suburbs, mainly through history, sociology, and
geography; the second half focuses on specific policy and community and economic development
initiatives. The major class project will be a study of gentrification in Philadelphia's Chinatown with the
community organization Asian Americans United, part of a multi-city Chinatown study in collaboration
with the Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund and colleagues in Boston and New York.
672. (EDUC672, FOLK672) Introduction to Ethnographic and Qualitative Research in Education.
(C) Hall, Wortham.
A first course in ethnographic participant observational research, its substantive orientation, literature,
and methods. Emphasis is on the interpretive study of social organization and culture in educational
settings, formal and informal. Methods of data collection and analysis, critical review of examples of
ethnographic research reports, and research design and proposal preparation are among the topics
and activities included in this course.

Page 29 of 30

URBAN STUDIES
(AS) {URBS}
706. (ANTH704, COML706, EDUC706, FOLK706) Culture/Power/Subjectivities. (C)
Hall.Prerequisite(s): EDUC 547.
This doctoral level course will introduce students to a conceptual language and theoretical tools for
analyzing and explaining the complex intersection of racialized, ethnic, gendered, sexual, and classed
differences and asymmetrical social relations. The students will examine critically the interrelationships
between culture, power, and subjectivity through a close reading of classical and contemporary social
theory. Emphasis will be given to assessing the power of various theories for conceptualizing and
explaining mechanisms of social stratification as well as the basis of social order and processes of
social change.
714. (CPLN714) Policy Analysis & Program Evaluation for Planning. (A) Wong.
Exploration of the intended and unintended consequences of public policy pertaining to land use,
transportation, housing, education, growth management and economic development.

Page 30 of 30

