VISUAL STUDIES
(AS) {VLST}
We live in an increasingly visual culture. New technologies and philosophies of vision influence
how we see ourselves and our world, and how we think about seeing itself. Students can engage
these developments through a multidisciplinary course of study, connecting the theory, practice,
and culture of seeing.
L/R 101. Eye, Mind, and Image. (C) May be counted toward the Hum/SocSci or NatSci/Math Sectors.
Class of 2010 Hatfield/Leja. Fulfills General Education in Sectors IV (Humanities and Social Sciences)
and VII (Natural Science and Mathematics). This course is required of all Visual Studies Majors (stage
1).
Visual Studies 101 provides an introduction to the collaboration of eye, mind, and image that produces
our experience of a visual world. How and what do we see? How do we perceive color, space, and
motion? What is an image? Does seeing vary across cultures and time? What can art tell us about
vision? Is there a 21st-century form of seeing? This course combines different approaches to the
study of vision, drawing from psychology, cognitive science, philosophy, history of art, and fine art.
Professors representing two or three disciplines present lectures that demonstrate the methods of
their disciplines and draw connections across fields.
This course combines different approaches to the study of vision, drawing from psychology,
cognitive science, philosophy, history of art, and fine art. Professors representing two or three
disciplines present lectures that demonstrate the methods of their disciplines and draw connections
across fields.
102. Form and Meaning. (C) Bendtsen/Hyland. This course is required of all Visual Studies Majors
(stage 1 or 2).
This course will introduce students to the theory and practice of image making, focusing on the
development of observational skills and analytical thinking. We will look at conventions of artistic
representation across time and cultures; discuss types of visual information and modes of formal
language; explore visual narrative techniques; and seek to expand our understanding of the role
images play in our culture.
We will look at conventions of pictorial representation across time and cultures; discuss types of
visual information and modes of formal language; explore visual narrative techniques; and seek to
expand our understanding of the roll images play in our culture.
103. 3 Dimensions: Time and Space. (C) Freedman/Neighbor. This course is required of all Visual
Studies Majors (stage 1 or 2).
Through studio projects, readings and class discussion, this class will begin to address, both
conceptually and physically, basic 3D structures and translations between 3D and 2D, as well as
materiality, experiential phenomena, light and time-based processes. The interconnection between
mediums in our cultural climate employs a wide range of tools, processes, and ideas. It is imperative
that visual studies students recognize and think through these connections. The work produced and
ideas confronted in this class will facilitate discussions and constructive criticism on the
fundamentalsof space and time via the experiential, conceptual, and the formal as essential elements
of meaning.
The interconnection between mediums in our cultural climate employs a wide range of tools,
processes, and ideas. It is imperative that visual studies students recognize and think through theses
connections. The work produced and ideas confronted in this class will facilitate discussions and
constructive critism on the fundamentals of space and time via the experiential, conceptual, and the
formal as essential elements of meaning.
L/R 211. (PSYC111) PERCEPTION. (C) Staff. Topics for this course vary each semester. Dept
permission required. This course can count toward Sector A, (Stage 2 or 3) of the Visual Studies
Major.

Page 1 of 7

VISUAL STUDIES
(AS) {VLST}
SM 212. (PSYC311) Research Experience in Perception. (C) Rust.Prerequisite(s): One semester of
statistics, and one of the following: PSYC 111, 149, 151, 217, or permission of instructor. Dept
permission required. Undergraduates only. This course can count toward Sector A, (Stage 2 or 3) of
the Visual Studies Major.
In this research course, students will begin by first replicating earlier experiments to measure human
visual memory capacity. After several class discussions to discuss ideas, each student will design and
conduct their own experiment to further investigate visual and/or familiarity memory.
L/R 217. (BIBB217, PSYC217) Visual Neuroscience. (B) Rust.Prerequisite(s): PSYC 001, COGS
001, or VLST 101. This course can count toward Sector A, (Stage 2 or 3) of the Visual Studies Major.
An introduction to the scientific study of vision, with an emphasis on the biological substrate and its
relation to behavior. Topics will typically include physiological optics, transduction of light, visual
thresholds, color vision, anatomy and physiology of the visual pathways, and the cognitive
neuroscience of vision.
L/R 221. (PHIL244) Introduction to Philosophy of Mind. Domotor, Miracchi. This course can count
toward Sector A, (Stage 2 or 3) of the Visual Studies Major.
In this course, we will explore philosophical questions concerning the nature of minds. In seeking to
understand the nature of minds, philosophers and psychologists have often used metaphors drawn
from the forms of technology available to them. Leibniz once described the mind as a mill, while Freud
compared the mind to a hydrolytic and electromagnetic system. In our own time, many have followed
Alan Turing's proposal and have viewed the mind as a special kind of computer; indeed, this
"Computational Theory of Mind" forms the foundation for much work in contemporary cognitive
science. In this class, we will explore the extent to which the computational theory of mind can
adequately characterize the distinctive capacities involved in representing an external environment
and having conscious experiences that is displayed by minds in general and human minds in
particular. Although an introductory class in philosophy or logic will aid students' understanding, no
prior familiarity with the philosophy of mind or cognitive science will be presumed.
SM 222. (PHIL330) Philosophy of Perception. (M) Hatfield. Department Majors Only. This course
can count toward Sector A, (Stage 2 or 3) of the Visual Studies Major.
Taking our perceptual experience as a given, what causes it? In a realistic mood, we accept that
objects in the environment, or in the "external world," cause us to have the perceptual experiences
that we do (as of a table with food, or as of a garden with flowers in it). Yet on this realistic view, our
perception is the result of a causal chain that leads from object to eye to brain to experiences, and we
are only given the last element: the experience. So how do we really know how our experiences are
caused, and where do we get the idea that they are casued by an external world of physical objects?
The seminar will focus on the problem of the external world as examined by David Hume, Thomas
Reid, G. E. Moore, and Bertrand Russell, along with recent authors.

Page 2 of 7

VISUAL STUDIES
(AS) {VLST}
SM 223. (ARTH667, PHIL223, PHIL423) Philosophy and Visual Perception. (C) Hatfield, Connolly.
This course can count toward Sector A, (Stage 2 or 3) of the Visual Studies Major.
It seems, at first glance, that vision puts us into direct contact with reality. At the same time, we know
that at least some of our visual experiences are illusory or hallucinatory. Such cases are in fact quite
widespread in our ordinary lives (as we will see in this course). In these cases, however, vision almost
always fails to match reality. Given this, how can we trust vision? Does it give us direct contact to
reality, or are our visual experiences instead more like a veil between us and the real world? In this
course we will explore different philosophical theories of perception that try to make sense of what
vision is in a way that also accounts for illusions and hallucinations. To better understand and evaluate
these theories, we will spend some time exploring different kinds of illusions and hallucinations in
detail. Towards the end of the course, we will turn to successful cases of vision. In particular we will
focus on cases of visual expertise, where experts train their visual systems in ways that better yield
knowledge in a particular domain. Some readings for the course will be posted on Canvas, while
others will be drawn from the required course reader, Philosophy of Perception: A Contemporary
Introduction, by William Fish.
235. (AAMW635, ARTH235, ARTH635, NELC285, NELC685) Introduction to Visual Culture of the
Islamic World. (C) Humanities & Social Science Sector. Class of 2010 & beyond. Holod. This course
can count toward Sector B, (Stage 2 or 3) of the Visual Studies Major.
A one-semester survey of Islamic art and architecture which examines visual culture as it functions
within the larger sphere of Islamic culture in general. Particular attention will be given to relationships
between visual culture and literature, using specific case studies, sites or objects which may be
related to various branches of Islamic literature, including historical,didactic, philosophical writings,
poetry and religious texts. All primary sources are available in English translation.
L/R 232. (ARTH102) Renaissance to Contemporary: Introduction to Western Art, 1400 to the
Present. (B) Arts & Letters Sector. All Classes. Dombrowski, Kim, Shaw. This course can count
toward Sector B, (Stage 2 or 3) of the Visual Studies Major.
This course is an introduction to the visual arts including painting, sculpture, print culture, and new
media such as photography, film, performance and installation art-in Europe and the United States
from 1400 to the present. It offers a broad historical overview of the key movements and the artists of
the period, as well as an investigation into the crucial themes and contexts that mark visual art
production after the middle ages. Such themes include the secularization of art; the (gendered) role of
the artist in society; the sites of art production and consumption such as the artist's studio, the royal
courts and the art exhibition; the materials of art; the import of technology and science to art's making,
content and distribution; the rise of art criticism; and the socio-political contexts of patronage and
audience; among others.
L/R 233. (ARTH103, EALC013) Art and Civiliation in East Asia. (M) Arts & Letters Sector. All
Classes. Davis/Steinhardt. This course can count toward Sector B, (Stage 2 or 3) of the Visual Studies
Major.
Introduction to major artistic traditions of China and Japan and to the methodological practices of art
history. Attention given to key cultural concepts and ways of looking, in such topics as: concepts of the
afterlife and its representation; Buddhist arts and iconography; painting styles and subjects; and more
broadly at the transmission of styles and cultural practices across East Asia. Serves as an introduction
to upper level lecture courses in East Asian art history cultures. If size of class permits, certain
sessions will be held in the University Museum or the Philadelphia Museum of Art.

Page 3 of 7

VISUAL STUDIES
(AS) {VLST}
234. (ARTH104, SAST200, SAST500) Introduction to Art in South Asia. (C) Arts & Letters Sector.
All Classes. Meister. This course can count toward Sector B, (Stage 2 or 3) of the Visual Studies
Major.
This course is a survey of sculpture, painting and architecture in the Indian sub-continent from 2300
B.C., touching on the present. It attempts to explore the role of tradition in the broader history of art in
India, but not to see India as 'traditional' or unchanging. The Indian sub-continent is the source for
multi-cultural civilizations that have lasted and evolved for several thousand years. Its art is as rich and
complex as that of Europe and diverse. This course introduces the full range of artistic production in
India in relation to the multiple strands that have made the cultural fabric of the sub-continent so rich
and long lasting.
L/R 236. (ARTH294, ARTH694, GSWS294) Art Now. (M) Silverman. This course can count toward
Sector B, (Stage 2 or 3) of the Visual Studies Major.
One of the most striking features of today's art world is the conspicuous place occupied in it by the
photographic image. Large-scale color photographs and time-based installations in projections are
everywhere. Looking back, we can see that much of the art making of the past 60 years has also been
defined by this medium, regardless of the form it takes. Photographic images have inspired countless
paintings, appeared in combines and installations, morphed into sculptures, drawings and
performances, and served both as the object and the vehicle of institutional critique. They are also an
increasingly important exhibition site: where most of us go to see earthworks, happenings and bodyart. This course is a three-part exploration of our photographic present.
250. (FNAR250, FNAR550) Introduction to Printmaking. (B) Staff. Course Fee $75.00
The course offers an introduction to several forms of printmaking including: intaglio, screen printing,
relief, and monoprinting. Through in-class demonstrations students are introduced to various
approaches to making and printing in each medium. The course enhances a student's capacity for
developing images through two-dimensional design and conceptual processes. Technical and
conceptual skills are developed through discussions and critiques.
251. (FNAR271, FNAR571) Introduction to Photography. (C) Course Fee $75.00
This course is an introduction to the basic processes and techniques of black & white photography.
Students will learn how to expose and process 35mm film, SLR camera operation, darkroom
procedures & printing, basic lighting and controlled applications. It begins with an emphasis on
understanding and mastering technical procedures and evolves into an investigation of the creative
and expressive possibilities of making images. This is a project-based course, where students will
begin to develop their personal vision, their understanding of aesthetic issues and photographic
history. Assignments, ideas and important examples of contemporary art will be presented via a series
of slide lectures, critiques and discussion. No previous experience necessary. 35mm SLR cameras will
be available throughout the semester for reservation and checkout from the photography equipment
room.
252. (FNAR145, FNAR545) Sculpture Practices. (C) Staff.
As an introduction to traditional and contemporary three-dimensional practice, this course is
concerned with the concepts and methodologies surrounding three-dimensional art making in our
time. Students experiment with a variety of modes of production, and develop some of the
fundamental techniques used in sculpture. In addition to these investigations, assignments relative to
the history and social impact of these practices are reinforced through readings and group discussion.
Processes covered include use of the Fab Lab, wood construction, clay, paper, mixed media, and
more.

Page 4 of 7

VISUAL STUDIES
(AS) {VLST}
260. (FNAR150) Photography Practices. (C) Staff. Course Fee $75.00
This course is an introduction to the basic principles, strategies and processes of photographic
practice. It is designed to broaden the student's aesthetic explorations and to help the student develop
a visual language based on cross-disciplinary artistic practice. Through a series of projects and
exercises students will be exposed to a range of camera formats, techniques and encouraged to
experiment with the multiple modes and roles of photography - both analogue and digital. Attention will
also be given to developing an understanding of critical aesthetic and historical issues in photography.
Students will examine a range of historical and contemporary photowork as an essential part of
understanding the possibilities of image making.
253. (FNAR123, FNAR523) Drawing I. (D) Staff.
This course is designed to develop visual awareness and perceptual acuity through the process of
drawing. Students learn to sharpen perceptual skills through observational drawing, and to explore the
expressive potential of drawing. A variety of problems and media will be presented in order to
familiarize students with various methods of working and ways of communicating ideas visually.
Subject matter will include object study, still life, interior and exterior space, self-portrait and the figure.
Different techniques and materials (charcoal, graphite, ink, collage) are explored in order to
understand the relationship between means, material and concept. Critical thinking skills are
developed through frequent class critiques and through the presentation of and research into historical
and contemporary precedent in drawing.
SM 261. (CINE061, FNAR061, FNAR661) Video I. (C) Staff. Course Fee $75.00
This course provides students with the introductory skills and concepts related to producing short
works that explore the language of the moving image. Students will learn the basics of
cinematography and editing through a series of assignments designed to facilitate the use of the
medium for artistic inquiry, cultural expression and narrative storytelling, through both individual and
group projects.
264. (FNAR264, FNAR636) Art, Design and Digital Culture. (C) Course Fee $75.00
This course is an introduction to the fundamental perception, representation, aesthetics, and design
that shape today's visual culture. It addresses the way artists and designers create images; design
with analog and digital tools; communicate, exchange, and express meaning over broad range of
media; and find their voices within the fabric of contemporary art, design, and visual culture. Emphasis
is placed on building an extended form of visual literacy by studying and making images using a
variety of representation techniques; learning to organize and structure two-dimensional and threedimensional space, and designing with time-based and procedural media. Students learn to develop
an individual style of idea-generation, experimentation, iteration, and critique as part of their creative
and critical responses to visual
265. (FNAR340, FNAR640) Digital Photography. (C) Staff. Course Fee $75.00
This class offers an in-depth technical and conceptual foundation in digital imagery and the
opportunity to explore the creative, expressive possibilities of photography. Students will become
proficient with the basic use of the camera, techniques of digital capture, color management and color
correction. They will also develop competency in scanning, retouching, printing and a variety of
manipulation techniques in Photoshop. Through weekly lectures and critiques, students will become
familiar with some of the most critical issues of representation, consider examples from photo history,
analyze the impact of new technologies and social media. With an emphasis on structured shooting
assignments, students are encouraged to experiment, expand their visual vocabulary while refining
their technical skills. No previous experience is necessary. Although it is beneficial for students to have
their own Digital SLR camera, registered students may reserve and checkout Digital SLR cameras
and other high-end equipment from the department.

Page 5 of 7

VISUAL STUDIES
(AS) {VLST}
SM 301. (ARTH301, VLST501) What is Visual Studies?. (C) Staff.Prerequisite(s): VLST 101 or
Instructor Permission. This course is required of all Visual Studies Majors (Stage 2).
Visual Studies 301 is a seminar-format course that challenges students to develop independent ideas
about how the eye, the mind and the image that is created therein, all work together to inform our
conception of the world at large. Rather than present a unified viewpoint, the course asks the
question, "What is visual studies?" by examining parallel and sometimes antagonistic approaches to
the ways that human beings understand sight and the concept of visuality. Over the course of the
semester, students will discuss and write about various approaches to vision, examining this
contested field through the lenses of several disciplines -- including psychology, philosophy, and art
history. By parsing and assimilating diverse ideas, students will decide for themselves what are the
most pertinent and relevant approaches to the various avenues of research that present themselves in
the emerging interdisciplinary field of Visual Studies.
SM 303. (VLST503) The Rise of Image Culture: History and Theories. Leja. This course can count
toward Sector B, (Stage 2 or 3) of the Visual Studies Major.
Images are ubiquitous in the cultural life of the 21st century, yet only two centries ago they were rare.
When and how did pictures come to permeate daily life? How has ordinary experience--psychological,
social, cultural, intellectual--changed as a result? This seminar addresses these questions through
close reading of influential historical and theoretical writings about the rise of image culture and its
effects, including Benjamin, Debord, McLahan, Mitchell.
SM 501. (ARTH301, VLST301) What is Visual Studies?. (C) Staff.
Visual Studies 301 is a seminar-format course that challenges students to develop independent ideas
about how the eye, the mind and the image that is created therein, all work together to inform our
conception of the world at large. Rather than present a unified viewpoint, the course asks the
question, "What is visual studies?" by examining parallel and sometimes antagonistic approaches to
the ways that human beings understand sight and the concept of visuality. Over the course of the
semester, students will discuss and write about various approaches to vision, examining this
contested field through the lenses of several disciplines -- including psychology, philosophy, and art
history. By parsing and assimilating diverse ideas, students will decide for themselves what are the
most pertinent and relevant approaches to the various avenues of research that present themselves in
the emerging interdisciplinary field of Visual Studies.
SM 305. (VLST505) What is an Image?. Verstegen. This course can count toward Sector A, (Stage 2
or 3) of the Visual Studies Major.
The course explores various concepts of images. It considers natural images (as in optics), images as
artifacts, virtual images, images as representations, and works of art as images. Themes to include:
the image controversy in cognitive science, which asks whether some cognitive representations are
irreducibly imagistic; the question of whether some images resemble what they represent; the
development of the concept of the virtual image and of three-dimensional images; the notions of
pictorial representation and non-representational images in art. Readings from C. S. Peirce, Nelson
Goodman, Robert Hopkins, Dominic Lopes, W. J. T. Mitchell, John Kulvicki, and Mark Rollins, among
others.
SM 395. Senior Project. (E) Staff. This course is required of all Visual Studies Majors. (Stage 4)
Seniors only.
Permission of Instructor Required.
399. Independent Study. Staff. See department for appropriate section numbers

Page 6 of 7

VISUAL STUDIES
(AS) {VLST}
SM 503. (VLST303) Rise of Image Culture. Leja.
Images are ubiquitous in the cultural life of the 21st century, yet only two centries ago they were rare.
When and how did pictures come to permeate daily life? How has ordinary experience--psychological,
social, cultural, intellectual--changed as a result? This seminar addresses these questions through
close reading of influential historical and theoretical writings about the rise of image culture and its
effects, including Benjamin, Debord, McLahan, Mitchell.
SM 505. (VLST305) What is an Image?. Hatfield.
SM 540. (ARTH572) TOPICS IN VISUAL CULTURE. (M)
599. Independent Study. (C) Staff. See department for appropriate section numbers
619. MGMT COMM: ADV. PERSUAS.
649. INTL EXCH TEL AVIV.

Page 7 of 7

